<p>Some time after their creation, men grew disobedient. In
anger, Puluga, the Creator, sent a flood which covered the
whole land, except perhaps Saddle Peak where Puluga himself
resided. Of all creatures, the only survivors were two men
and two women who had the fortune to be in a canoe when the
flood came. The waters sank and they landed, but they found
themselves in a sad plight. Puluga recreated birds and
animals for their use, but the world was still damp and
without fire. The ghost of one of the peoples' friends took
the form of a kingfisher and tried to steal a brand from
Puluga's fire, but he accidentally dropped it on the
Creator. Incensed, Puluga hurled the brand at the bird, but
it missed and landed where the four flood survivors were
seated. After the people had warmed themselves and had
leisure to reflect, they began to murmur against the
Creator and even plotted to murder him. However, the
Creator warned them away from such rash action, explained
that men had brought the flood on themselves by their
disobedience, and that another such offense would likewise
be met with punishment. That was the last time the Creator
spoke with men face to face. [<a href="#Gaster">Gaster</a>,
pp. 104-105]</p>