<p>Gabidji, Little Wallaby, traveled east carrying a full
waterbag. Djunbunbin, Thunder or Storm man, followed him,
angry because Gabidji had water. At Dagula, Djunbunbin's
thunder chant grew stronger, and a deluge of rain swept
away Gabidji's hut and some other Dreaming men who were
with him. Their bones were found by later miners. [<a href="#Berndt">Berndt &amp; Berndt</a>, pp. 42-43]</p>
<p>Yaul was thirsty, but his brother Marlgaru refused to
let him have any water from his own full kangaroo-skin
waterbag. While Marlgaru was out hunting, Yaul sought and
found the bag. He jabbed it with a club, tearing it. Water
poured out, drowning both brothers and forming the sea. It
was spreading inland, too, but Bird Women came from the
east and restrained the waters with a barrier of roots of
the <i>ngalda</i> kurrajong tree. This is why <i>ngalda</i>
roots contain fresh water. [<a href="#Berndt">Berndt &amp;
Berndt</a>, pp. 44-45]</p>
<p>Djinta-djinta (Willy Wagtail) built a strong hut and
weathered a heavy rain for many days, but at last a heavy
deluge swept him and his hut into a waterhole, where he
remains. [<a href="#Berndt">Berndt &amp; Berndt</a>, p.
188]</p>