<p>The medicine man Wis-kay-tchach recognized all animals
as his relations, and he considered some wolves to be his
brother and two nephews. To stave off starvation one hard
winter, they went hunting and came across the track of a
moose. Wis-kay-tchach and the old wolf stopped to smoke
while the two young wolves hunted the moose, but they
didn't return, so the older two went after them. They found
that the young wolves had eaten all of the moose. Wis made
a fire, and when he had done so, the moose was restored
again, already cut up. The young wolves divided the spoils
into four, but one of them retained the tongue and upper
lip. Wis grumbled, and the young wolves gave the delicacies
to him. They made marrow fat, but soon this was also eaten,
and they began to hunger again. They separated, with Wis
and one young wolf hunting together. The wolf killed some
deer, brought them home in his stomach, disgorged them on
his arrival, and told his uncle that he could catch no
more. Wis spent the night setting enchantments. In the
morning, he told his nephew to go hunting, but warned him
to throw a stick over every valley and hollow place before
jumping over, or some evil would befall him. The wolf,
following a deer, forgot this warning, jumped a hollow, and
fell into a river where he was killed and devoured by water
lynxes. Wis followed when his nephew didn't return. When he
came upon the river, he guessed what had happened, and this
was confirmed when a kingfisher told him it saw the wolf
skin serving as a door mat of the water lynxes. The bird
also told him that the water lynxes often come ashore, and
Wis must turn himself into a stump close by to get his
revenge. In gratitude, Wis began to put a ruff around the
bird's neck, but the bird flew off before Wis could finish,
which is why kingfishers have only part of a ruff at the
back of their head. Wis returned to his camp to prepare;
among other things, he provided a large canoe and in it
embarked all animals that could not swim. He returned to
the area of the lynxes before daybreak, transformed himself
into a stump, and waited. The black one crawled out of the
water, then the gray one. Then the white one, who had
killed the wolf, emerged, but it grew suspicious on seeing
the stump. It sent frogs and snakes to try to pull it down,
but Wis kept himself upright. The lynx, suspicions lulled,
went to sleep. Wis returned to normal shape and, though
warned to shoot the lynx's shadow, forgot and shot its
body. He shot a second arrow at the shadow, wounding the
animal, but the lynx escaped into the river, which then
overflowed and flooded the whole country. Wis escaped in
his canoe and began rescuing the animals which could swim
only a short time. Wis then tied a string around the leg of
a loon and told it to dive for some earth, assuring it that
he could restore it to life if it drowned. When the line
ceased to play out, Wis hauled up the drowned loon, which,
when restored to life, said that it had found no bottom.
Wis next send an otter, then a beaver on the same errand,
with similar results. Finally he send a rat fastened to a
stone, and the rat, when hauled up, had a little earth in
its paws. He dried the earth and blew on it to expand it.
He sent a wolf to explore it, but the wolf soon returned,
saying it was too small. He blew on it a long time, then
sent a crow to explore. The crow didn't return, so Wis
decided the land was big enough and disembarked with all
the animals. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, pp. 297-301; <a href="#Roheim">Roheim</a>, p. 157, Kelsen, p. 147]</p>
<p>Nenebojo went hunting every day while his brother stayed
home. One day, he returned to find his brother missing. His
searching brought him to the shore of a lake, where he saw
a kingfisher looking into the water. The bird would not
tell Nenebojo what it saw until Nenebojo painted its
feathers; then it said it saw Nenebojo's brother, whose
skin the water-spirits were using as a door flap. It also
told where the water-spirits sun themselves. Nenebojo went
there and, using his rod, assumed the shape of a rotten
stump for a disguise. When the lions came out of the water,
they were suspicious of the new stump until one broke off a
piece and saw it was rotten. When they had gone to sleep,
Nenebojo struck them on their heads with his rod. As he did
so, the lake's water rose. He fled; a woodpecker directed
him to a tall pine tree on a mountain. Nenebojo climbed the
tree and began building a raft, which he finished just as
the waters reached his neck. He put pairs of all kinds of
animals on the raft and floated about. After a while, he
sent otter to dive for some earth, but the otter returned
without any. Next, beaver was sent, but in vain. Next he
sent muskrat, who returned with a little sand in its claws
and mouth. He dried the grains and blew them into the water
with the horn he had used to summon the animals. They
formed an island, which Nenebojo enlarged. He sent a raven
to determine its size, but it didn't return. He next sent a
hawk, which reported back that the raven had been eating
dead bodies on the shore, so Nenebojo cursed the raven
never to have anything to eat but what it steals. After
another interval, Nenebojo sent a caribou to explore the
size. It said that the island was still too small, so
Nenebojo grew it once more and finished. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, pp. 305-306]</p>
<p>Menaboshu regarded all animals as his kin. Once, when
times were bad, he asked the wolves for some food. The food
was so good that he asked to hunt with them, which they
allowed. After ten days of hunting, they reached a
crossroads; the wolves determined to go one way, and
Menaboshu went another, taking with him a little wolf whom
he loved dearly as a brother. They then hunted sometimes
together and sometimes alone. Menaboshu warned the wolf to
stay away from a certain lake, knowing that his worst enemy
the serpent-king lived there. But this warning just made
the wolf curious, and three days later he ventured out on
the ice of the lake. The ice broke under him, and he was
drowned. Menaboshu waited five days for the wolf's return;
then he began wailing, knowing that the serpent-king had
got him. Menaboshu could not get the serpent-king in the
winter, so he came to the lake in the spring. He set up
loud lamentations when he saw the footprints of his lost
brother there. This attracted the attention of the
serpent-king, and when Menaboshu saw it stick up its head,
he immediately turned himself into a tree stump. The
serpent-king and other serpents saw nothing unusual but the
new tree stump. Suspicious of it, the serpent-king sent one
large snake to it. This snake squeezed hard enough to crack
Menaboshu's bones, but he bore the pain stoically. The
snakes then went to sleep on the beach. Menaboshu emerged
from his disguise, grabbed his bow and arrows, and shot
dead the serpent-king and three of its sons. The other
snakes escaped into the water, making much noise and
lashing with their tails. Some snakes scattered the
contents of their medicine bags; the waters began to swell,
and torrents of rain fell from the newly gathered clouds.
In short time, the whole earth was flooded. Menaboshu fled,
hopping from mountain to mountain, but the waves followed
him. He climbed to the top boughs of a fir tree on the top
of one tall mountain, and the waters stopped rising just as
they reached his mouth. Menaboshu stayed there five days
and nights. Finally, he saw a loon swim by, and he asked it
do dive for some earth. The loon did so repeatedly, but
without success. Then Menaboshu saw the body of a drowned
muskrat. He breathed on it to restore it to life and asked
it to dive. The muskrat dived and, though it came up dead,
it had a few grains of earth. Menaboshu dried these and
blew them over the water. Where they landed, they grew into
islands, and these grew together, with Menaboshu's
guidance, into continents. Menaboshu then wandered around
breathing on the corpses of animals to bring them back to
life and otherwise restoring nature and land to its former
beauty. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, pp. 301-304]</p>
<p>Wenebojo travelled awhile with five wolves. The oldest
wolf became distrustful of Wenebojo and decided they should
leave him, but one wolf, who liked Wenebojo, stayed with
him and hunted food for him, and Wenebojo considered him
his nephew. One night, this wolf didn't return from
hunting. Wenebojo followed his tracks the next day and saw
that he had fallen into a river. The <i>manidog</i>, or
spirits under the water, caused the wolf's death because
there wouldn't be any wild animals left if Wenebojo had his
own way. Wenebojo went to the bank of a lake where the
<i>manidog</i> sometimes come out to sun themselves; he
turned himself into a stump and waited four days. At last,
the <i>manidog</i> came out to bask. A big snake was
suspicious that the stump was Wenebojo, so he went and
squeezed it four times, harder and harder each time, but
Wenebojo withstood it, and the snake said it wasn't
Wenebojo. When all the <i>manidog</i> were asleep, Wenebojo
shot the two kings, wounding them. All the <i>manidog</i>
rushed back into the water. Wenebojo followed the stream
and came across a kingfisher, which said it was waiting for
Wenebojo's nephew's guts to float by. Wenebojo had a string
of beads that had belonged to his nephew, and he offered
them to the bird with the secret intent of strangling it,
but his hand slipped and the bird escaped with the beads,
which is why the kingfisher's head is bushy and it has a
necklace of white spots. Wenebojo went on and met an old
lady carrying basswood bark. He told her he wasn't
Wenebojo, and the old lady told him that they were laying
out basswood to detect Wenebojo, and that she was doctoring
the wounded kings. Wenebojo learned her song and her route;
then he killed her, skinned her, and put on her skin. He
had to shave off his calf muscles to make it fit. With this
disguise, he got entrance into the king's house. He saw his
nephew's skin hanging there, which made him angry. Two
snakes on either side of the door watched him suspiciously,
but he told them his medicine wouldn't work with them
watching. He went to the kings and pushed his arrows
deeper, killing them. He ran out, breaking through basswood
strings in his escape. The <i>manidog</i> saw the basswood
moving and sent water there. Wenebojo heard the water
coming and ran for a hill. Soon the water came to the top
of the hill, and he climbed a tall pine tree there. The
water kept coming, and he told the pine tree to stretch
itself to double its length. It did that four times but
could not stretch more. The water stopped rising just short
of Wenebojo's mouth. Wenebojo had to defecate, and the
feces floated around his mouth. Wenebojo saw an otter and
asked it to dive for some earth. The otter tried, but it
drowned. Wenebojo blew on it, and it came back to life and
told him that it hadn't seen anything. A beaver got farther
but also failed. Next, the muskrat tried. It also floated
up drowned, but Wenebojo found a grain of earth in each of
its paws and in its mouth. He restored the muskrat to life,
dried the grains in the sun, and threw them on the water,
forming a small island. The three animals and Wenebojo went
on the island, and Wenebojo took handfuls of dirt from the
island and threw them around, making it bigger. Other
animals came from the water to the island, too. Wenebojo
asked a caribou to run around the island to test its size.
The caribou soon returned and reported that the land wasn't
big enough yet. Wenebojo threw more dirt far and wide and
sent the caribou off again, but the caribou never came
back. It got tired and stayed in the north. For a long
time, Wenebojo travelled, having forgotten about his anger.
But one day he happened to remember, and he sat crying. He
threatened to pull up the four layers below the earth and
pull down the four layers of the sky to get at the
<i>manidog</i> there. The first <i>manido</i> from below
the earth and the Great Spirit <i>manido</i> from the sky
believed he would do that, and they invited him to meet
with them, but he wouldn't come until they sent a white
otter (seal?) as a messenger. Wenebojo didn't have any
parents, so they created parents for him. The <i>manido</i>
from the bottom formed a clay figure, shook his rattle and
talked, and the figure came to life. It was an Indian
woman. The Great Spirit put the last rib from the woman
into a clay figure and likewise created a man. The
<i>manidog</i> also told Wenebojo about the Medicine Dance.
The people were meant to live forever, but Wenebojo's
brother Nekajiwegizik hadn't been invited. He was the first
person to die, and he decreed that everyone who lived on
earth would have to follow his road to the other world. [<a href="#Barnouw">Barnouw</a>, pp. 33-45]</p>
<p>For a time, Wenebojo travelled with a pack of wolves
which he considered his nephews. When they parted, one of
the wolves stayed with him and hunted for him. Wenebojo had
a dream that the <i>manidog</i>, evil underwater spirits
who were jealous of him, would kill his nephew, so he told
his nephew not to cross any streams. But the wolf tried to
jump a stream while hunting and was captured and killed.
Wenebojo knew what happened. He followed a river to a lake
and found a kingfisher in a tree looking into the water,
waiting for some of Wenebojo's nephew's guts to float by.
Wenebojo offered it a string of beads if it would tell him
what it knew. The bird described how the <i>manidog</i> sun
themselves. Wenebojo intended to wring the bird's neck as
he put on the beads, but the bird slipped away. That is why
the kingfisher has ruffled feathers around its neck.
Wenebojo prepared two arrows by rubbing them on the lips of
women having their first menses. Then he turned himself to
a stump by the lake and waited for the <i>manidog</i> to
sun themselves. When they emerged, the king was suspicious
of the stump and had a snake squeeze it and a bear claw it,
but Wenebojo withstood these attacks. Wenebojo wished the
<i>manidog</i> would go to sleep, and when they slept, he
shot and wounded the king and the next to the king; then he
ran away as the water was rising behind him. Woodchuck
saved him by digging a shelter, which they stayed in two
days until the water receded. Later, Wenebojo encountered
an old woman carrying basswood bark. He assured her that he
was not Wenebojo, and she told him that the bark would be
used to detect Wenebojo when he touched it, that she was
treating the wounded <i>manidog</i>, and that only she had
eaten his nephew. With that, he killed her, put on her
clothes, and wished himself to look like her. He went to
the wigwam of the wounded <i>manidog</i> and killed them.
As he ran away, he heard a roar of water behind him. He ran
to a bluff; a pine tree there told Wenebojo to climb it,
and the tree stretched higher, saving Wenebojo from the
flood with his nose barely above water. Wenebojo asked loon
to dive down to get some dirt, but the loon died in the
attempt. Otter and beaver failed similarly. Muskrat,
however, was able to get a few grains of dirt before he
passed out. Wenebojo used this dirt to recreate land. He
told a big bird to fly around it; the land would grow as it
did so. When the bird returned in four days, he sent an
eagle out to grow the land larger. Wenebojo cut up the body
of the king <i>manido</i> and made a lake of fat from it.
The animals that ate or touched it acquired fat in their
bodies. [<a href="#Barnouw">Barnouw</a>, pp. 63-69]</p>
<p>The evil serpent Meshekenabek carried off Manobozho's
cousin into a deep lake. Manobozho caused the sun to shine
fiercely on the lake to drive out Meshekenabek and his
companions. When they emerged, Manobozho shot an arrow into
the serpent's heart. The serpent, in his dying rage,
stirred up the waters of the lake and spread waves over the
land. Fleeing, Manobozho warned the Indians also to retreat
to a mountain top. The waters still rose, though, and
Manobozho made a raft for them to take refuge on. However,
Manobozho couldn't disperse the flood without some earth to
use as a nucleus. Muskrat finally succeeded in diving for
some dirt, and Manobozho used it to make the waters recede.
[<a href="#Howey">Howey</a>, pp. 291-293]</p>
<p>In the beginning of time, in September, there was a
great snow. A mouse nibbled a hole in the leather bag which
contained the sun's heat, and the heat escaped and melted
all the snow in an instant. The waters rose to cover even
the highest mountains. One old man had foreseen the flood
and warned everybody, but the others had thought to escape
to the hills; they drowned in the flood. The old man had
prepared a canoe and survived, rescuing animals he came
across. After a while he sent, in turn, the beaver, otter,
muskrat, and duck to find land. Only the duck returned,
with some mud in its bill. The old man cast the mud on the
water and blew on it, making solid land. [<a href="#Vitaliano">Vitaliano</a>, p. 170]</p>