<p>A flood once covered the whole earth except for the top
of the coastal range Serra do Mar. Members of the three
tribes Coroados, Cayurucres, and Cames, swam for the
mountains holding lighted torches between their teeth. The
Cayurucres and Cames wearied and drowned, and their souls
went to dwell in the heart of the mountain. The Coroados
made it and stayed there, some on the ground and some in
the branches of trees. Several days passed without food and
without the water lowering. Then some <i>saracuras</i>, a
species of waterfowl, flew to them with baskets of earth.
The birds began throwing the earth into the water, and the
water sank. The people urged the birds to hurry, so the
birds called the ducks to help them. When the flood
subsided, the Coroados descended, except for the ones which
had climbed into trees, who became monkeys. The souls of
the Cayurucres and Cames burrowed their way out of the
mountain and kindled a fire. From the ashes of the fire,
one of the Cayurucres molded jaguars, tapirs, ant-bears,
bees, and many other animals; he made them live and told
them what they should eat. But one of the Cames similarly
made pumas, poisonous snakes, and wasps to fight the other
animals. [<a href="#Gaster">Gaster</a>, p. 125]</p>