<p>A man survived the deluge in his canoe. He sent forth a
raven, but it did not return, and in punishment it was
changed from white to black. He next sent out a wood
pigeon; it returned with mud in its claws, by which the man
inferred that the earth had dried, so he landed. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, p. 297]</p>
<p><a id="Cree2" name="Cree2">Wissaketchak</a> was an old
magician. A certain sea monster hated him and, when the old
man was paddling his canoe, the monster lashed the sea with
its tail, causing waves that flooded the land.
Wissaketchak, though, built a great raft and gathered on it
pairs of all animals and birds. The sea monster continued
its exertions, and the water continued to rise, until even
the highest mountain was covered. Wissaketchak sent a duck
to dive for earth, but the duck could not reach the bottom
and drowned. He then sent the muskrat, which, after a long
time, returned with its throat full of slime. Wissaketchak
moulded this slime into a disk and floated it on the water;
it resembled a nest such as muskrats make on ice. The disk
swelled, and Wissaketchak made it grow more by blowing on
it. As it grew and hardened, he sent the animals onto it.
It became the land we now inhabit. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, pp. 309-310]</p>