<p>The first people Etim 'Ne (Old Person) and his wife Ejaw
came to earth from the sky. At first, there was no water on
earth, so Etim 'Ne asked the god Obassi Osaw for water, and
he was given a calabash with seven clear stones. When Etim
'Ne put a stone in a small hole in the ground, water welled
out and became a broad lake. Later, seven sons and seven
daughters were born to the couple. After the sons and
daughters married and had children of their own, Etim 'Ne
gave each household a river or lake of its own. He took
away the rivers of three sons who were poor hunters and
didn't share their meat, but he restored them when the sons
begged him to. When the grandchildren had grown and
established new homes, Etim 'Ne sent for all the children
and told them each to take seven stones from the streams of
their parents, and to plant them at intervals to create new
streams. All did so except one son who collected a
basketful and emptied all his stones in one place. Waters
came, covered his farm, and threatened to cover the whole
earth. Everyone ran to Etim 'Ne, fleeing the flood. Etim
'Ne prayed to Obassi, who stopped the flood but let a lake
remain covering the farm of the bad son. Etim 'Ne told the
others the names of the rivers and streams which remained
and told them to remember him as the bringer of water to
the world. Two days later he died. [<a href="#Courlander">Courlander</a>, pp. 267-269]</p>