<p>A strange woman wearing an unusual fur cape came to a
village. One of the boys playing in the area pulled at her
garment and saw her backbone, which had protuberances like
a plant that grows along the seashore. The children jeered
at this. The parents told the children not to laugh, and
the woman sat by the water's edge at low tide. As the tide
rose and touched her feet, she moved up a little and sat
down again. The tide kept rising, following the woman. The
villagers soon became alarmed at its unprecedented height,
and having no canoes, they prepared rafts and provisioned
them with fish and water. At last the tide covered the
whole island. The people saved themselves on the rafts. The
various rafts landed in different places, which is how the
tribes became dispersed. [<a href="#Erdoes">Erdoes &amp;
Ortiz</a>, pp. 472-473]</p>
<p>Long ago there was a flood which killed all creatures
except a single raven. This raven, Ne-kil-stlas, was a
person who could don and doff his feathers at will; he had
been born of a woman who had had no husband. When the flood
had gone down, he looked about but found no mate, so he
became very lonely. He married a cockle (<i>Cardium
nuttalli</i>) from the beach, and he constantly brooded and
wished for a companion. In time, he heard a faint cry, such
as from a newborn child, from the shell. The cry gradually
grew louder, and at last a small female child appeared. She
grew larger and larger and finally married the raven. From
them all the Indians were produced. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, p. 319]</p>