<p>Kunyan ("Wise Man"), foreseeing the possibility of a
flood, built a great raft, joining the logs with ropes made
from roots. He told other people, but they laughed at him
and said they'd climb trees in the event of a flood. Then
came a great flood, with water gushing from all sides,
rising higher than the trees and drowning all people but
the Wise Man and his family on his raft. As he floated, he
gathered pairs of all animals and birds he met with. The
earth disappeared under the waters, and for a long time no
one thought to look for it. Then the musk-rat dived into
the water looking for the bottom, but he couldn't find it.
He dived a second time and smelled the earth but didn't
reach it. Next beaver dived. He reappeared unconscious but
holding a little mud. The Wise Man placed the mud on the
water and breathed on it, making it grow. He continued
breathing on it, making it larger and larger. He put a fox
on the island, but it ran around the island in just a day.
Six times the fox ran around the island; by the seventh
time, the land was as large as it was before the flood, and
the animals disembarked, followed by Wise Man with his wife
(who was also his sister) and son. They repeopled the land.
But the flood waters were still too high, and to lower
them, the bittern swallowed them all. Now there was too
little water. Plover, pretending sympathy at the bittern's
swollen stomach, passed his hand over it, but suddenly
scratched it. The waters flowed out into the rivers and
lakes. [<a href="#Gaster">Gaster</a>, pp. 117-118]</p>