<p>Lalohona, a woman from the depths of the sea, was
enticed ashore by Konikonia with a series of images. She
warned him that her parents, Kahinalii and
Hinakaalualumoana, would cause the ocean to flood the land
so that her brothers, the <i>pao'o</i> fish, may search for
her. At her suggestion, they fled to the mountains and
built their home in the tops of the tallest trees. After
ten days, Kahinalii sent the ocean; it rose and overwhelmed
the land. The people fled to the mountains, and the flood
covered the mountains; they climbed the trees, and the
flood rose above the trees and drowned them all. But the
waters began to subside just as they reached the door of
Konikonia's house. When the waters retreated, he and his
people returned to their land. This flood is called
kai-a-ka-hina-lii. [<a href="#Barrere">Barrère</a>,
p. 23]</p>
<p>All the land was once overflowed by the sea, except for
the peak of Mauna Kea, where two humans survived. The event
is called <i>kai a Kahinarii</i> (sea of Kahinarii). There
was no ship involved. [<a href="#Gaster">Gaster</a>, p.
110; Barrère, p. 22]</p>
<p>In the earliest times in Hawaii, there was no sea, nor
even fresh water. Pele came to Hawaii because she was
displeased over her husband having been enticed from her.
Her parents gave her the sea so she could bring her canoes.
At Kanaloa she poured the sea from her head. It rose until
it covered the high ground, leaving only a few mountains
not entirely submerged. She later caused it to recede to
what we see today. This sea was named after the mother of
Pele, Kahinalii, because the sea belonged to her; Pele
simply brought it. [<a href="#Barrere">Barrère</a>,
pp. 23-24]</p>
<p>The people had turned to evil, so Kane punished their
sin with a flood. Nu'u and his company were saved by
entering into the Great-Canoe, a large canoe roofed over
like a house, which had been given them by Kane. The canoe
contained a number of things, and Nu'u ruled over the whole
like a chief. After the flood, these people repopulated the
islands. The waters came up as a wicked brother-in-law of
Nu'u was indulging himself in pleasure. He ran to enter the
ark, but his calls were unheard by those inside. He prayed
to the god Lono in the name of his sister but did not
escape. He became angry at the first pair of people who had
brought this trouble by bringing evil into the world, and
he prayed to Lono that the whole earth be destroyed and
that the first pair of people be brought back to life to
witness the trouble they caused. [<a href="#Barrere">Barrère</a>, pp. 19-21]</p>
<p>Nuu was of the thirteenth generation from the first man.
The gods commanded Nuu to build an ark and carry on it his
wife, three sons, and males and females of all breathing
things. Waters came and covered the earth. They subsided to
leave the ark on a mountain overlooking a beautiful valley.
The gods entered the ark and told Nuu to go forth with all
the life it carried. In gratitude for his deliverance, Nuu
offered a sacrifice of pig, coconuts, and awa to the moon,
which he thought was the god Kane. Kane descended on a
rainbow to reproach Nuu for his mistake but left the
rainbow as a perpetual sign of his forgiveness. [<a href="#Kalakaua">Kalakaua</a>, p. 37; <a href="#Barrere">Barrère</a>, pp. 21-22]</p>
<p>A high chief had two boys killed for playing with his
drums. Their father Kamalo sought the help of the shark god
Kauhuhu to get revenge. Kauhuhu told the man to build a
special fence around his place and to collect 400 black
pigs, 400 red fish, and 400 white chickens. Months later,
Kauhuhu came in the form of a cloud. He caused a great
storm which washed everyone on the hillside, except Kamalo
and his people, into the harbor, where sharks devoured
them. [<a href="#Westervelt">Westervelt</a>, pp.
110-116]</p>