<p>God, upset at mankind's wickedness, resolved to destroy
it, but Noah was righteous and found favor with Him. God
told Noah to build an ark, 450 x 75 x 45 feet, with three
decks. Noah did so, and took aboard his family (8 people in
all) and pairs of all kinds of animals (7 of the clean
ones). For 40 days and nights, floodwaters came from the
heavens and from the deeps, until the highest mountains
were covered. The waters flooded the earth for 150 days;
then God sent a wind and the waters receded, and the ark
came to rest in Ararat. After 40 days, Noah sent out a
raven, which kept flying until the waters had dried up. He
next sent out a dove, which returned without finding a
perch. A week later he set out the dove again, and it
returned with an olive leaf. The next week, the dove didn't
return. After a year and 10 days from the start of the
flood, everyone and everything emerged from the ark. Noah
sacrificed some clean animals and birds to God, and God,
pleased with this, promised never again to destroy all
living creatures with a flood, giving the rainbow as a sign
of this covenant. Animals became wild and became suitable
food, and Noah and his family were told to repopulate the
earth. Noah planted a vineyard and one day got drunk. His
son Ham saw him lying naked in his tent and told his
brothers Shem and Japheth, who came and covered Noah with
their faces turned. When Noah awoke, he cursed Ham and his
descendants and blessed his other sons. [<a href="http://bible.gospelcom.net/bible?passage=gen+6-9" rel="external" target="_blank">Genesis
6-9</a>]</p>
<p>Men lived at ease before the flood; a single harvest
provided for forty years, children were born after only a
few days instead of nine months and could walk and talk
immediately, and people could command the sun and moon.
This indolence led men astray, especially to the sins of
wantonness and rapacity. God determined to destroy the
sinners, but in mercy he instructed Noah to warn them of
the threat of a flood and to preach to them to mend their
ways. Noah did this for 120 years. God gave mankind a final
week of grace during which the sun reversed course, but the
wicked men did not repent; they only mocked Noah for
building the ark. Noah learned how to make the ark from a
book, given to Adam by the angel Raziel, which contained
all knowledge. This book was made of sapphires, and Noah
put it in a golden casket and, during the flood, used it to
tell day from night, for the sun and moon did not shine at
that time. The flood was caused by male waters from the sky
meeting the female waters from the ground. God made holes
in the sky for the waters to issue from by removing two
stars from the Pleiades. He later closed the hole by
borrowing two stars from the Bear. That is why the Bear
always runs after the Pleiades. The animals came to the ark
in such numbers that Noah could not take them all; he had
them sit by the door of the ark, and he took in the animals
which lay down at the door. 365 species of reptiles and 32
species of bird were taken. Since seven pairs of each kind
of clean animal were taken, the clean animals outnumbered
the unclean after the flood. One creatures, the <i>reem</i>
was so big it had to be tethered outside the ark and follow
behind. The giant Og, king of Bashan, was also too big and
escaped the flood sitting atop the ark. In addition to
Noah, his wife Naamah, and their sons and sons' wives,
Falsehood and Misfortune also took refuge on the ark.
Falsehood was initially turned away when he presented
himself without a mate, so he induced Misfortune to join
him and returned. When the flood began, the sinners
gathered around it and rushed the door, but the wild beasts
aboard the ark guarded the door and set upon them. Those
which escaped the beasts drowned in the flood. The ark, and
the animals in it, were tossed around on the waters for a
year, but Noah's greatest difficulty was feeding all the
animals, for he had to work day and night to feed both the
diurnal and nocturnal animals. When Noah once tarried in
feeding the lion, the lion gave him a blow which made him
lame for the rest of his life and prevented him from
serving as a priest. On the tenth day of the month of
Tammuz, Noah sent forth a raven, but the raven found a
corpse to devour and did not return. A week later Noah sent
out a dove, and on its third flight it returned with an
olive leaf plucked from the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem,
for the Holy Land had not suffered from the flood. Noah
wept at the devastation when he left the ark, and Shem
offered a thank-offering; Noah could not officiate due to
his encounter with the lion. [<a href="#Ginzberg">Ginzberg</a>, 
pp. 319-335; see also <a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, pp. 143-145]

</p>
<p>Aprocryphal scripture tells that Adam directed that his
body, together with gold, incense, and myrrh, should be
taken aboard the Ark and, after the flood, should be laid
in the middle of the earth. God would come from thence and
save mankind. [<a href="#Platt">Platt</a>, p. 66, 80 (2
Adam 8:9-18, 21:7-11)]</p>
<p>A woman "clothed with the sun" gave birth to a man child
who was taken up by God. The woman then lived in the
wilderness, where the Devil-dragon, cast down to earth,
persecuted her. At one time he cast a flood of water from
his mouth trying to wash her away, but the earth helped the
woman and swallowed the flood. [<a href="http://bible.gospelcom.net/bible?passage=rev+12" rel="external" target="_blank">Revelation
12</a>]</p>