<p>Pictorial records of ancient Incan rulers show that a
flood rose above the highest mountains. All created things
perished, except for a man and woman who floated in a box.
When the flood subsided, the floating box was driven by the
wind to Tiahuanacu, about 200 miles from Cuzco, where the
Creator told them to dwell. The Creator molded new people
from clay at Tiahuanacu. On each figure, the Creator
painted dress and hair style, and he gave each nation
distinctive language, songs, and seeds to plant. When he
had brought them to life, he ordered them into the earth to
travel underground and emerge from caves, springs, tree
trunks, etc. in their various homes. He then created the
sun, moon, and stars. [<a href="#Bierhorst1988">Bierhorst, 1988</a>, pp. 200,202; <a href="#Gaster">Gaster</a>, p. 127; <a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, p. 271]</p>
<p>The creator god Viracocha made the earth and sky, and he
created stone giants to live in it. After a while the
giants became lazy and quarrelsome, and Viracocha decided
to destroy them. Some he turned back to stone, and these
stone statues still exist at Tiahuanaco and Pucara. He
destroyed the rest with a great flood. When the flood
subsided, it left the lakes Titicaca and Poopo, and it left
seashells on the Altiplano at elevations of 3660 m.
Viracocha saved two stone giants from the flood and with
their help created people his own size. He reached down
into Lake Titicaca and drew out the Sun and Moon to provide
light so he could admire his new creation. In those days,
the Moon was even brighter than the Sun, but the Sun grew
jealous and threw ashes onto the Moon's face. [<a href="#Gifford">Gifford</a>, p. 54]</p>
<p>A large, rich city once existed on the Altiplano. One
day, a group of ragged Indians came and warned the proud
inhabitants that the city would be destroyed by earthquake,
flood, and fire. Most inhabitants just scoffed and
eventually had the ragged people flogged and thrown out.
Some of the city's priests, though, heeded the warning and
went to live as hermits in a temple on a hill. Some time
later, a red cloud appeared on the horizon. Soon it had
grown and covered the area, and its red glow eerily lit the
night. Suddenly, with a flash and a rumble, an earthquake
destroyed many of the city's buildings, and a red rain
poured down. Other earthquakes and more rain followed, and
a flood soon covered the ruined city; this water is Lake
Titicaca today. None of the city's inhabitants survived
save the priests. The descendants of the prophets became
the Callawayas, wise men of the valleys. [<a href="#Gifford">Gifford</a>, pp. 55-56]</p>