<p>Before the Apaches emerged from the underworld, there
were other people on the earth. Dios told an old man and
old woman that it would rain forty days and nights. People
were warned to go to the tops of four mountains
(Tsisnatcin, Tsabidzilhi, Becdilhgai, and another whose
identity isn't known), and not to look at the flood or sky.
The people didn't believe the old couple. When the rains
came, only a few people made it to the mountain tops and
shut their eyes. Those who looked at the flood turned into
a fish or frog (as did some who were caught in the flood);
if they looked at the sky, they turned into a bird. The
people sitting on the mountains were told, when they got
hungry, to think of food, and Dios would feed them. After
eighty days, Dios told the 24 people remaining to open
their eyes and come down. These 24 people went into 24
mountains. Eight other people survived the flood who were
able to travel by looking where they wanted to go, and they
were there. These people told the Apaches about the flood
before going into two mountains themselves. Dios told them
to stay there until the world is destroyed. Around the year
2000, when the Apaches dwindle in number, the surface of
the earth will again be destroyed, this time by fire. [<a href="#Opler">Opler</a>, pp. 111-113]</p>
<p>When people still lived in the underworld, the chief,
after an argument with his mother-in-law, decided that men
and women should live apart for awhile, so the men all
moved to the other side of a river, and the chief prayed to
Kogulhtsude (a water spirit) to widen the river. They lived
four years like this. The women's farms became less and
less productive, and they began to go hungry. The men
wanted sexual satisfaction and began some sexual
perversions; the older girls, likewise affected, began to
masturbate with elk horns, eagle feathers, and other
things. These things impregnated them and produced the
monsters that afterwards killed men. About that time,
Coyote found a baby in a whirlpool in the river and took it
out to raise himself. But the baby was Kogulhtsude's child,
and he sent water out to draw it back. Some people were
drowned and turned into frogs and fish; the other men and
women escaped together to a tall mountain. Coyote used his
magic to make the mountain grow, but the waters kept
rising, finally overflowing onto this world. The people
suspected Coyote was causing the trouble and found the baby
hidden under his coat. They threw the baby (which was
almost dead from drying) into the water, and the water
receded. The people went down into the underworld again.
When they later emerged, the surface of the earth was
covered with water from that flood. The four Holy Ones made
black, blue, yellow, and glittering hoops and threw them in
each compass direction, and the water receded. They
commanded the four winds to dry the land further. [<a href="#Opler">Opler</a>, p. 20, 265-268]</p>
<p>As the waters rose, a chief led his warriors into the
Superstition Mountains in Arizona. When it became clear
that even the mountain peaks would be submerged, the chief
told his braves that, rather than let them drown
ignominiously, he would turn then to stone. They are there
guarding the heights even today. [<a href="#Vitaliano">Vitaliano</a>, p. 170]</p>