<p>A brother and sister tried to dig out a bamboo rat, but
it told them it was digging to escape a coming flood and
instructed them to seal themselves inside a drum to save
themselves. They did so. Some richer people took refuge on
rafts, but the rafts overturned when the waters receded,
and those people died. The brother and sister made a hole,
saw water, sealed the drum again, and waited longer. The
second time they made a hole, they saw dry land and
emerged. (In another version, they took along a needle and
knew the flood was over when no water leaked in the hole
they poked.) They looked far and wide for mates, but they
were the only survivors. A malcoha cuckoo sang to them,
"brother and sister should embrace one another." They slept
together. After seven years, the child was born as a gourd.
They put it behind their house and went about their work.
Later, hearing noises from the gourd, they burnt a hole in
its shell, and people of the different races came out,
first Rumeet, then Kammu, Thai, Westerner, and Chinese. The
Rumeet are darker because they rubbed off charcoal around
the hole. At first, none of those people could speak. They
sat down in a row on a tree trunk, it broke, and they all
cried out, and with that they were able to speak. Later,
the different people all learned different ways of writing.
[<a href="#Lindell">Lindell et. al.</a>, pp. 268-278]</p>