<p>The previous world had a sky of sandstone rock. Two
gods, Thunder and Nagaicho, saw that it was old. They
stretched it, propped up its four corners, created flowers,
clouds and other pleasant things. They created a man out of
earth, putting in grass for the stomach and heart, clay for
liver and kidneys, pulverized red stone mixed with water
for blood. They split one of his legs to make a woman. Then
they made the sun and moon. But the creation didn't last.
It rained day and night as people slept. The sky fell.
Humans and animals were all washed away by a flood which
covered everything. There was only water, no wind, rain,
frost, clouds, or sun. It was very dark. Then this earth,
with its long horns, traveled underground from the north;
Nagaicho rode on its head. Where the earth dragon turned
its head upwards, mountain ridges and islands formed. It
lay down in the south; Naigaicho covered it with clay and
plants to create the mountains. People appeared who had
animal names. Later, when the indians came, those people
turned into animals. Naigaicho traveled over the earth
making sea foods, creeks, trees, ocean waves, and generally
making it comfortable for people. When he got to his home
in the north, he and his dog stayed there. [<a href="#GiffordBlock">Gifford &amp; Block</a>, pp. 79-82; <a href="#Erdoes">Erdoes &amp; Ortiz</a>, pp. 107-109]</p>