<p>After death came into the world as a result of a
macaque's curse, sky and earth longed for human souls and
bones. That is how the flood began. An orphaned brother and
sister lived in squalor in a village. A pair of golden
birds flew down to them one day, warned them that a huge
wave would flood the earth, and told them to take shelter
in a gourd and not to come out until they heard the birds
again. The two children warned their neighbors, but the
people didn't believe them. The children sawed off the top
of a gourd and went inside. For ninety-nine days, there was
no wind or rain, and the earth became parched. Then
torrents of rain fell, and the resulting flood washed
everything away. The brother and sister occasionally could
hear the gourd bump against the bottom of heaven. After
long waiting, they heard the birds calling, left the gourd,
and found they had landed atop a mountain, and the flood
had receded. But now there were nine suns and seven moons
in the sky, and they scorched the earth during the day. The
two golden birds returned with a golden hammer and silver
tongs and instructed the children how to use them to get
the dragon king's bow and arrows. Brother and sister went
to the dragon pond and struck the reef-home of the dragon
king with the hammer. This raised such a racket that the
dragon king sent his servants (various fish) to
investigate. The children grabbed the fish with the tongs
and threw them on the bank. At last, the dragon king
himself came to investigate and had to give his bow and
arrows when he was likewise caught. With these, brother and
sister shot down all but the brightest sun and moon.
Brother and sister then went in search of other people,
exploring north and south respectively. They found nobody
else, and the golden birds appeared again and urged them to
marry. They refused, but the birds told them it was the
will of heaven. After divinations in the form of several
improbable events (tortoise shells landing a certain way, a
broken millstone came together, and the brother shooting an
arrow through a needle's eye--all happening three times),
they consented. They had six sons and six daughters which
traveled different directions and became the ancestors of
different races. [<a href="#Miller">L. Miller</a>, pp.
78-84]</p>