<p>The Star people listened to Jaguar and killed and ate a
woman. Kuamachi wanted to punish them, but they were too
many and too powerful. He went to Wlaha, their chief, and
invited them to help in picking <i>dewaka</i> fruit. They
were suspicious, but Kuamachi left some fruit with them,
and they liked the taste so much they decided to go help
pick fruit. Kuamachi and his grandfather Mahanama led them
to the trees. The star people climbed the trees and started
eating fruit; they weren't afraid of only two people.
Kuamachi dropped one fruit; water came out of it, spread,
and caused a flood, covering everything but the trees.
Kuamachi thought "canoe," and a canoe appeared. He and
Mahanama stayed in the canoe. Mahanama threw the baskets he
was weaving into the water, and they turned into anacondas,
crocodiles, caimans, and other deadly animals. Kuamachi set
a termite nest on fire, filling the forest with smoke. He
and his grandfather got bows and arrows they had hidden in
a cave. When they got back and the smoke cleared, the Star
people were begging for mercy. The two shot them. The
people fell down into the water below and were attacked by
the dangerous animals. Kuamachi and his grandfather ran out
of arrows before shooting Wlaha, the leader of the Star
people. He had turned himself into seven people and caught
seven arrows. The surviving wounded Star people climbed
back into the trees. Wlaha shot the arrows into heaven, and
with the help of Ahishama, who changed into the troupial,
and Kütto, who became a frog, he formed a ladder which
he and the surviving Star people climbed up and became
stars. Ahishama became Mars; Wlaha became the Pleiades;
Mönettä, the scorpion, became the Big Dipper; and
Ihette, One Leg, became Orion's belt. Kuamachi also decided
to climb up. He had Kahshe, the piranha, cut the vine
behind him so that the demon Ioroko couldn't climb up with
his basket of poison. Kuamachi brought Akuaniye, the Peace
Plant, with him, which he offered to Wlaha, and they
stopped fighting. Kuamachi became the Evening Star. Before
this, the night sky had been empty and black. [<a href="#de">de Civrieux</a>, pp. 109-116]</p>