<p>The rain god Aokeu ("Red Circle" for the red clay he
washes around the island), who was lowly born of the
drippings from stalactites, disputed with the ocean god Ake
to see which was more powerful. Ake summoned help from the
wind god Raka and his twin children Tikokura, who is seen
in the line of curling billows which break over reefs, and
Tane-ere-tue, who manifests in storm waves. They attacked
the coast, reaching the height of the Makatea, a raised
barrier reef plateau surrounding the island, hundreds of
feet high. Proof of their deeds may be seen in seashells
embedded in high rocks. Meanwhile, Aokeu caused five days
and nights of rain, washing the red clay and small stones
into the ocean and carving deep valleys. Rangi, the
people's first chief, had been forewarned and led his
people to Rangimotia, the central peak. Soon water covered
everything except a long narrow strip of soil, and the tide
continued rising. Rangi waded through water up to his chin
to reach the temple of the supreme god Rongo, and appealed
to him. Rongo looked at the war of the waters and cried
"Enough!" The sea subsided and the rain stopped, leaving
the island with its present landscape. Aokeu was judged the
victor, because the sea had been stopped by the rocky
heights, but but the rains flowed far into the ocean,
carrying red clay to mark their progress. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, pp. 246-248; <a href="#Vitaliano">Vitaliano</a>, p. 168]</p>