<p>The Puzob, an industrious dwarf people, were the first
inhabitants of the earth. God destroyed them with a flood
because of their carelessness in their observation of
custom. They heard that a terrible storm was coming, so
they put some stones in a pond and sat on them, but the
dwarfs were all destroyed. Jesucristo sent down four angels
to investigate what was happening on earth. They removed
their clothes and bathed, whereupon they became doves. Some
other angels were sent down; they were turned into buzzards
when they ate the dead. [<a href="#Horcasitas">Horcasitas</a>, p. 194]</p>
<p>In the first period of the world lived the Saiyamkoob,
"the Adjusters," a dwarf race which built cities now in
ruins. They worked in darkness, as the sun had not yet
appeared. When it did, they turned to stone, and their
images can be found in the ruins. Food for the workers was
lowered by rope from the sky, but the rope was cut, the
blood ran out of it, and the earth and sky separated. This
period ended with water over the earth. The Tsolob, "the
Offenders," lived in the second period. These, too were
destroyed by a flood. The Maya reigned during the third
period, but their period was also ended by flood. The
fourth and present age is peopled by a mixture of all
previous races. [<a href="#Alexander1920">Alexander,
1920</a>, p. 153]</p>
<p>After people were created, the sky fell upon the earth,
and the waters followed them. The world was destroyed. The
four Bacab gods managed to escape and now hold up the four
corners of the sky. [<a href="#Horcasitas">Horcasitas</a>,
p. 191]</p>
<p>Two floods had destroyed humanity. Three people escaped
a third and final flood in a canoe. [<a href="#Horcasitas">Horcasitas</a>, p. 191]</p>