<p>Manabush wanted to punish the evil manidoes, the Ana
maqkiu who had killed his brother Wolf. He invented the
ball game and asked the Thunderers to play against the Ana
maqkiu, who appeared from the ground as bears. After the
first day of play, Manabush made himself into a pine tree
near where the manidoes played. When they returned the next
morning, the manidoes were suspicious of the tree, so the
sent for Grizzly Bear to claw it and Serpent to strangle
and bite it. Manabush withstood these attacks, allaying
their suspicion. When the ball play took everyone else far
away, Manabush shot and wounded the two Bear chiefs with
arrows and then ran away. The underground Ana maqkiu soon
came back, saw the wounded Bear chiefs, and called for a
flood from the earth. Badger hid Manabush in the earth, so
the Ana maqkiu gave up the search just as the water was
starting to fill Badger's burrow. The underground people
took their chiefs to a wigwam and sent for an old woman to
heal them. Manabush followed, took the old woman's skin and
disguised himself in it. He entered the wigwam, killed the
two chiefs, and took the bear skins. The Ana maqkiu at once
pursued; water poured out of the earth in many places.
Manabush climbed a great pine tree on the highest mountain.
When the waters still rose to threaten him, he commanded
the tree to grow. This he did four times, but the waters
still rose. He called to Kisha Manido for help, who
commanded the waters to stop. Seeing water everywhere,
Manabush called to Otter to dive down and bring up some
earth. Otter tried but drowned before reaching bottom. Mink
failed similarly. Then Manabush called on Muskrat, who also
returned drowned but had some mud in his paw. Manabush blew
on Muskrat to return him to life. Then he took the earth,
rubbed it between his hands, and threw it on the water,
thus creating a new earth. Manabush told Muskrat that his
tribe would always be numerous. He gave the skin of the
Gray Bear chief to Badger and kept the skin of the White
Bear chief. [<a href="#Judson">Judson</a>, p. 21-25]</p>