<p>Hailibu, a kind and generous hunter, saved a white snake
from a crane which attacked it. Next day, he met the same
snake with a retinue of other snakes. The snake told him
that she was the Dragon King's daughter, and the Dragon
King wished to reward him. She advised Hailibu to ask for
the precious stone that the Dragon King keeps in his mouth.
With that stone, she told him, he could understand the
language of animals, but he would turn to stone if he ever
divulged its secret to anyone else. Hailibu went to the
Dragon King, turned down his many other treasures, and was
given the stone. Years later, Hailibu heard some birds
saying that the next day the mountains would erupt and
flood the land. He went back home to warn his neighbors,
but they didn't believe him. To convince them, he told them
how he had learned of the coming flood and told them the
full story of the precious stone. When he finished his
story, he turned to stone. The villagers, seeing this
happen, fled. It rained all the next night, and the
mountains erupted, belching forth a great flood of water.
When the people returned, they found the stone which
Hailibu had turned into and placed it at the top of the
mountain. For generations, they have offered sacrifices to
the stone in honor of Hailibu's sacrifice. [<a href="#Elder">Elder &amp; Wong</a>, pp. 75-77]</p>