<p>After the earth had become peopled, the great eagle told
a seer in the Gila valley, on three occasions, to warn the
people about a great flood that would soon come, but the
seer ridiculed him and ignored his warnings. Scarcely had
the bird gone for the third time when a tremendous clap of
thunder was heard. When morning came, the earth trembled,
and a great green wall of water roared down the valley and
destroyed everything in it. Szeukha, son of Chiowotmahke
(Earth maker), saved himself by floating on a ball of pine
resin. When the water receded somewhat, he landed on a
mountain above the Salt River; his cave and tools can still
be seen there. Szeukha made a ladder that reached into the
clouds and went to fight the great eagle, whom he thought
had caused the flood. They fought long, but at last he
killed the eagle. He found the bones and corpses of the
people which the eagle had abducted and returned them to
life. He also rescued a pregnant woman and her child. The
eagle had stolen her and taken her for his wife. She became
the mother of the Pima people. [<a href="#Erdoes">Erdoes
&amp; Ortiz</a>, pp. 473-475; <a href="#Gaster">Gaster</a>,
p. 115]</p>
<p>The Creator, Earth Doctor, made the mountains, the
waters, the plants; he made the sun and moon in their
courses. Then he made all kinds of birds and creeping
things, and he made clay images and commanded them to
become living humans. They obeyed him, multiplied, and
spread over the earth. In time, as sickness and death were
still unknown, the population outran the available
sustenance, and people faced ever-increasing famine. The
Creator resolved to destroy the creatures he had made, so
he pulled down the sky, crushing to death all living
things. Then he restored the world and made humans again.
The earth gave birth to one known as Siuuh√ª or Elder
Brother. He spoke harshly to the Creator, and the Creator
feared him. Elder Brother shortened people's lives so that
they didn't multiply out of control as before. He resolved
further to destroy mankind entirely with a great flood. He
created a handsome youth to go among the Pimas, wed their
women, and beget children, staying with each wife only
until his first child was born. The first wife gave birth
four months after marriage and conception, and the
gestation periods became shorter with each successive wife,
until the last child was born at the time of the marriage.
(The people were amazed and frightened by the powers shown
by Elder Brother and his agent during these years.) This
last child's screams shook the earth, and it was he who
caused the flood. Meanwhile, Elder Brother had begun
fashioning, out of black gum, a jar in which to save
himself, and he announced his purpose to the Creator. The
Creator called the people together and warned them of the
nearing flood. He thrust his staff into the ground, boring
a hole all the way through the earth. Some people took
refuge in the hole. Other people appealed, futilely, to
Elder Brother. Elder Brother did tell coyote to find a big
log on which to float safely on the flood. Elder Brother
closed himself in the jar, known as Black House, and the
flood came. The jar bobbed on the waters until it came to
rest near the mouth of the Colorado River. It may be seen
there today; it is called Black Mountain. The Creator
survived the flood by enclosing himself in his reed staff
and floating. The coyote survived on his driftwood. Only
five sorts of birds survived, including the flicker and
vulture, by clinging to the sky with their beaks until a
god took pity on them and let them make nests from their
own down and float in them. Some people survived in the
hole which the Creator had made. Others survived in a
similar hole made by a powerful person called South Doctor.
Others appealed to the Creator, who told them to try to
find refuge on Crooked Mountain, and he directed South
Doctor to help them. South Doctor led the people to the
summit and, with his enchantments, four times raised the
mountain and arrested the rising waters, but then his
powers were exhausted. He threw his staff into the water,
where it cracked loudly. He sent a dog to see how high the
tide had risen, and when the dog reported that the water
was very near the top, the people were transformed into
stone. You may see them there today. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, pp. 283-287]</p>
<p>Because someone displeased the gods, a heavy rain began
pouring down, and water gushed from the broken ground,
swelling the rivers. For the first time, the wise Se-eh-ha
(Elder Brother) did not know what to do. Some people ran up
Slanting Mountain (Superstition Mountain) and prayed to the
Great Spirit to stop the flood, but when the water
threatened to swallow them up, they turned into rocks in
fright. Se-eh-ha and his brother Juvet-Makai (Earth
Medicine Man) hurriedly made canoes and rode out the flood
in them. Coyote used his magic to turn himself small and
crawl into his bamboo flute, in which he floated. Some
birds, including the swallow, buzzard, raven, oriole, and
hummingbird, clung to the sky with their bills. The flood
rose high enough to drench their tails, leaving them
drenched-looking for all time. The flood lasted four days,
and Se-eh-ha, Juvet-Makai, and Coyote were tossed in
different directions. Coyote landed on a high mountain near
the Colorado River; his flute was tightly stuck in the
rocks, so he left it there. He left to look for Se-eh-ha
and Juvet-Makai, finding them at Slanting Mountain
surveying the desolated land. Elder Brother rubbed some
dust off his chest onto the ground, where it turned into
ants. The ants began scattering the dirt, making it drier,
and Elder Brother said that is what he wants ants to do.
The three of them began making images to replace the lost
people. Elder Brother scolded Earth Medicine Man for making
his images so different, with one leg and one arm, and
Earth Medicine Man angrily threw away his images and sank
into the ground to find a place to live on the other side
of the earth. Elder Brother and Coyote placed their images
in a warm mud hut and waited for them to speak. Coyote's
images began laughing first; this displeased Elder Brother,
so he sprinkled cold water on them and threw them to the
cold north, where they became the Apaches. Coyote was
angered and disappeared as Earth Medicine Man had. After
four days, Elder Brother's images began laughing and
talking. They became the River People and repopulated the
Gila valley. (Later, Elder Brother became greedy and evil
and led Juvet-Makai's people to conquer the River People.)
[<a href="#Shaw">Shaw</a>, pp. 1-14]</p>