<p>Coyote dreamed that water would soon cover the world,
but nobody believed him. It rained, and the water started
rising. The people climbed trees because there were no
mountains to escape to. Coyote and a number of people
escaped on a log. With the help of Mole, Coyote created
mountains; then he created people for the new world. [<a href="#Roheim">Roheim</a>, p. 153]</p>
<p>One day, the Thunder People found trout in their spring.
At first, the people were afraid of them, but driven by
hunger, the people ate them, except for three children who
were warned by their grandmother not to eat them. The next
morning, all but those three children had been transformed
into deer. The children went to a very high mountain. Rain
came and flooded all but the mountaintop. The children
asked an old man what he could do; he said he didn't know,
but he dug all night while the children slept. In the
morning, he woke the children. The flood was gone, and the
world was beautiful. [<a href="#Roheim">Roheim</a>, pp.
153-154]</p>
<p>Everyone but Gopher was killed in a flood. He climbed to
the top of Mt. Kanaktai, and just as the water was about to
wash him off, it receded. He had no fire, so he dug into
the mountain until he found fire inside, thus bringing fire
again to the world. [<a href="#Roheim">Roheim</a>, p.
154]</p>
<p>Coyote lived with two little boys whom he had got by
deceit from one of the Wood-duck sisters. Everybody abused
the boys, so Coyote decided to set the world on fire. He
dug a tunnel at the east end of the world, filled it with
fir bark, and lit it. With his two children in a sack, he
called for rescue from the sky. Spider descended and took
Coyote back up through the gates of the sky. When they came
back, everything was roasted. Coyote drank too much water
and got sick. Kusku the medicine man jumped on his belly,
and water flowed out and covered the land. [<a href="#Roheim">Roheim</a>, p. 154]</p>