<p>When Pilchu Haram and Pilchu Budhi, the first man and
woman, reached adolescence, fire-rain fell for seven days.
They took refuge in a stone cave and emerged unharmed when
the flood was over. Jaher-era asked them where they had
been, and they replied that they had been under a rock. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, p. 197]</p>
<p>When social distinctions were assigned to the various
tribes, the Marndis were overlooked. Ambir Singh and Bir
Singh, two members of that tribe from Mount Here, were
incensed at this slight, and they prayed for fire from
heaven to destroy the other tribes. Fire fell and
devastated the country, destroying half the population. The
home of Ambir Singh and Bir Singh was stone, so they
escaped unhurt. Kisku Raj heard what had happened and was
told that Ambir Singh and Bir Singh were responsible. He
ordered them to explain themselves, and they told of their
being overlooked in the distribution of distinctions. Kisku
Raj told them not to act thus, and they would receive an
office. They stopped the fire-rain, and the Marndi were
appointed stewards over the property of kings and nobles
and over all rice. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, pp.
197-198]</p>
<p>While people were at Khojkaman, their misdeeds became so
great that the creator Thakur Jiu sent a fire-rain to
punish them. Only two people escaped, in a cave on Mount
Haradata. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, p. 198]</p>