<p>Yehl, the Raven, created man, caused the plants to grow,
and set the sun, moon, and stars in their places. Yehl's
wicked uncle had a young wife whom he was very fond and
jealous of. He did not want any of his nephews to inherit
his widow when he died, as Tlingit law dictates should
happen, so he murdered each of Yehl's ten older brothers by
drowning them or, according to some, by stretching them on
a board and beheading them. When Yehl grew to manhood, his
uncle tried to do the same to him. But Yehl's mother had
conceived him by swallowing a round pebble she had found at
low tide, and with another stone she had rendered him
invulnerable. When the uncle tried to behead Yehl, his
knife had no effect. In a rage, the uncle called for a
flood, and a flood came and covered all the mountains. Yehl
assumed his wings, which he could do at will, and soared
into the sky. He remained hanging by his beak from the sky
for ten days, while the water rose so high it lapped his
wings. When the water fell, Yehl let go, dropped like an
arrow onto a soft bank of seaweed, and was rescued by an
otter who brought him to land. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, pp. 316-317]</p>
<p>Raven had put a woman under the world to govern the
tides. Once he wished to see the undersea world, and he
caused the woman to raise the waters so that he might do so
while remaining dry. He directed her to raise the ocean
slowly so that people might have time to provision their
canoes. As the waters rose, bears and other animals were
driven to the mountaintops, and many of them swam out to
the people's canoes. Some people had taken dogs into their
canoes, and the dogs kept the bears off. Some people landed
on the tops of mountains, building dikes around them to
keep out the water. Uprooted trees, devil-fish, and other
strange creatures washed past. When the waters ebbed, the
survivors followed the tide down the mountain, but the
trees were all gone, and the people, having no firewood,
perished of cold. When Raven returned, he saw fish lying
high on the land, and he commanded them to turn to stone.
When he saw people coming down the mountain, he turned them
to stone also. When all mankind had been destroyed, he
created them anew out of leaves. That is why so many people
die during the autumn. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, pp.
317-318]</p>
<p>People were saved from a universal deluge in a giant
ark. The ark struck a rock and split in two. The Tlingits
were in one half of the ark, and all other people were in
the other half. This explains why there is a diversity of
languages. [<a href="#Gaster">Gaster</a>, p. 119]</p>