<p>A man, warned by God, survived the flood in a tree he
had hollowed out. After the deluge, he was hungry and built
a fire. God smelled the smoke and sent buzzard down to
investigate, but buzzard stayed to eat the dead animals,
and God condemned him to eat only rotten flesh thereafter.
God told Saint Michael the Archangel to go down, and Saint
Michael reversed the man's face and hind parts and turned
him into a monkey. [<a href="#Horcasitas">Horcasitas</a>,
p. 197]</p>
<p>A flood destroyed mankind. The children became flowers
when they jumped up to where the star is. A man was sent a
large dog. He went every day to clear the fields and found,
on returning home, that food had been prepared for him. He
resolved to discover the cook. [The story fragment ends
there, but see below, and see related myth of Huichol.] [<a href="#Horcasitas">Horcasitas</a>, p. 205]</p>
<p>God told a man to make an ark. After the deluge had
subsided, the man sent forth a dove, which came back.
Later, he sent it out again; it returned with muddy feet,
and the man left the ark. He happened upon a house and
decided to live there. Ants brought him corn. When he
returned every day, he found food prepared for him. He
watched his dog and one day found her, skinless, preparing
corn. He threw her skin in the fire, and she began to weep.
The couple lived together and had a baby. One day, the man
told his wife to make tamales out of the "tender one," and
the wife, misunderstanding, cooked their child. When the
man found out, he scolded his wife and ate the tamales
anyway. [<a href="#Horcasitas">Horcasitas</a>, pp.
205-206]</p>