<p>When the Tsuwo ancestors were dispersed, a great flood
came, and everyone was forced to flee to the top of Mount
Niitaka-yama. In their haste, none had brought fire with
them, and the people suffered cold. Someone saw a sparkle
on the top of a neighboring mountain and asked who would go
to bring fire back. A goat volunteered, swam to the other
mountain, and brought back a burning cord between its
horns, but it tired from the swim, and it drooped its head
and extinguished the fire before it made it back to land.
The people next sent out a <i>taoron</i> (?), which
succeeded in the quest; the people gathered around the
animal and patted it, which is why it has such shiny skin
and small body today. The people were unsure how to lower
the water. A wild pig offered to swim off and break a bank
lower in the river, and it asked the people to care for its
children if it drowned. The people agreed, the pig swam
off, and soon the flood water sank. The people decided to
make a new river, with the help of the animals, to prevent
another great flood. A snake guided the people and hollowed
out the bed of the stream. Thousands of birds paved the
channel with pebbles. Other animals worked to fashion the
river banks and valleys. Only the eagle didn't help, and in
punishment, it is not allowed to drink from the river. The
goddess Hipararasa came from the south and formed plains by
crushing the mountains. At the central ranges, though, an
angry bear protecting its homeland confronted her and bit
and wounded her child, so the goddess desisted. The land
hardened, so the mountains still stand today. The survivors
from Mount Niitaka-yama, in groups, wandered their various
ways. The idea of headhunting originated while they lived
on that mountain. [<a href="#Frazer">Frazer</a>, pp.
229-232]</p>