<p>A man and his wife, who was of supernatural origin,
could not satisfy the hunger of her father, named
Insatiable, who was also of supernatural origin. He had
grown so that he filled the entire council-house and had
eaten all the coconuts on the island. The husband, Kitimil,
saw one day that a mouse had been eating in his sugar-cane
field. His wife, Magigi, told him that it must have been
her father who had turned himself into a mouse. Kitimil
thought this was impossible, though, so he set a trap which
that night caught and killed the mouse. Magigi was
terrified that he had killed her father, and told him to
bring the mouse. Kitimil did so, and when he looked and saw
that the council-house was empty, he believed his wife. The
next morning, Magigi told Kitimil to take the mouse's blood
and four of its teeth and bury the body. When he had done
so, she said that a great flood will come and kill all the
people of Yap, so they must climb the highest mountain and
build a seven-story pile-dwelling there. They took some
leaves and oil and the blood and teeth of the mouse and
built the structure on the mountaintop. On the seventh day,
a great storm came, and the sea covered all of Yap. As the
water rose, Kitimil and Magigi climbed to higher stories of
their house. The deluge still rose when they reached the
top, so Magigi put some oil on a leaf and laid it on the
water, and immediately the storm ceased and the water
started abating. When the land was dry again, they found
that one other man had survived by lashing himself to an
outrigger anchored to a large stone. Magigi bore seven
children, who scattered across the land. [<a href="#Dixon">Dixon</a>, pp. 256-257]</p>