Makunaima created the birds and animals and put his son,
Sigu, in charge of them. Makunaima created a great tree
from which all food plants grew. Agouti discovered it first
but kept it secret, but Sigu sent Rat to follow him, and
the secret was out. Sigu decided it would be best to chop
down the tree and plant the seeds and cuttings so that the
food would be widespread. This they did, but Iwarrika, the
monkey, didn't help, so Sigu sent him to fetch water with
an open-work basket. When the tree was felled, the animals
discovered the hollow stump was filled with water
containing all kinds of fresh-water fish. But the water
began overflowing and threatened to flood the land, so Sigu
wove a magic basket and covered the trunk with it. When
Iwarrika returned, he saw the basket and, thinking the best
fruits were under it, lifted it to look. A torrent of water
flooded out and covered the countryside. Sigu led the birds
and climbing animals to tall cocorite trees on the highest
hill. He led the other animals to a cave and covered its
entrance with wax, first giving them a long thorn with
which to pierce the wax to determine when the water went
down. Many days of darkness and storm followed. The red
howler monkey cried in anguish so much at the cold and
hunger that his throat swelled and remains so to this day.
Sigu stayed with the birds in the cocorite tree,
occasionally dropping seeds. He heard that it took longer
and longer for them to hit water as the water dropped, and
eventually they thudded on the ground. At that moment, the
sky grew lighter. The trumpeter bird was in such a hurry to
descend that he flopped into an ant's nest, and the insects
gnawed his legs to the bone, giving his present appearance.
Sigu rubbed two pieces of wood together to make fire, but
the bush-turkey mistook the first spark for a firefly,
gobbled it up, and burnt his throat, explaining why turkeys
have red wattles today. The alligator was generally
unpopular and was accused of having stolen the spark. To
try to retrieve the spark, Sigu tore out the animal's
tongue, so alligators today have no tongue to speak of. The
plants which had been planted sprang to life, but the fish
were not distributed evenly. Monkeys are as curious as ever
but are now afraid of water. [Frazer,
pp. 253-265; Gifford, pp.
113-114]