Tengys (Sea) was once lord over the earth. Nama, a good
man, lived during his rule with three sons, Sozun-uul,
Sar-uul, and Balyks. Ãœlgen commanded Nama to build an
ark (kerep), but Nama's sight was failing, so he
left the building to his sons. The ark was built on a
mountain, and from it were hung eight 80-fathom cables with
which to gauge water depth. Nama entered the ark with his
family and the various animals and birds which had been
driven there by the rising waters. Seven days later, the
cables gave way from the earth, showing that the flood had
risen 80 fathoms. Seven days later, Nama told his eldest
son to open the window and look around, and the son saw
only the summits of mountains. His father ordered him to
look again later, and he saw only water and sky. At last
the ark stopped in a group of eight mountains. On
successive days, Nama released a raven, a crow, and a rook,
none of which returned. On the fourth day, he sent out a
dove, which returned with a birch twig and told why the
other birds hadn't returned; they had found carcasses of a
deer, dog, and horse respectively, and had stayed to feed
on them. In anger, Nama cursed them to behave thus to the
end of the world. When Nama became very old, his wife
exhorted him to kill all the men and animals he had saved
so that they, transferred to the other world, would be
under his power. Nama didn't know what to do. Sozun-uul,
who didn't dare to oppose his mother openly, told his
father a story about seeing a blue-black cow devouring a
human so only the legs were visible. Nama understood the
fable and cleft his wife in two with his sword. Finally,
Nama went to heaven, taking with him Sozun-uul and changing
him into a constellation of five stars. [Holmberg, pp. 364-365]