The god Kakumodan Sappatorroku and the goddess Budaihabu
descended to a place called Taurayan with the boy Sura, the
girl Nakao, a pig and a chicken. One day, two other gods,
Kabitt and Aka, while hunting nearby, saw the pig and
chicken and coveted them. They asked Kakumodan for them,
but as they had nothing to trade, they were refused. This
angered them, and they plotted to kill Kakumodan. They
called upon the four sea gods, Mahahan, Mariyaru,
Marimokoshi, and Kosomatora, who consented to help. They
told Kabitt and Aka that in five days, when the moon was
full, the sea will make a booming sound, and they should
escape to a mountain where there are stars. On the fifth
day, the two gods fled to a mountain, and when they reached
the summit, the sea began booming and rising. Kakumodan's
house was flooded, but he and his wife escaped by climbing
a ladder to the sky. In their haste, though, they forgot
the children, and upon reaching safety, they futilely
called for them. Sura and Nakao, however, had climbed into
a wooden mortar and had floated to safety to the Ragasan
mountain. The brother and sister, now alone in the world,
feared to offend the ancestral gods, but of necessity they
became man and wife. To mitigate the wrath of the gods,
they contacted each other as little as possible and
interposed a mat between them in their bed. They had three
sons and two daughters. During Nakao's first pregnancy, the
first grain of millet was found in her ear, and in time the
two learned the proper ritual for cultivating that grain.
[Frazer, pp. 226-227]
In an earthquake, mountains tumbled down, the earth
gaped, and hot subterranean waters gushed out and flooded
the whole earth. Two sisters and a brother escaped in a
wooden mortar and floated south to Rarauran. They landed
and climbed Mount Kaburugan to view the countryside; then
the sisters searched south and the brother searched west
for good land. Finding none, they returned and ascended to
the mountain's summit again. But the older sister tired
half way up, and when the other two returned for her, they
found she had turned into a rock. The brother and sister
wanted to return to their homeland, but the mortar was
rotten and no longer sea-worthy. Wandering away on foot,
they saw smoke in the distance and, fearing another
eruption and flood, hastened away. But the sister collapsed
in exhaustion, and they had to remain. Catastrophe ceased
to threaten, and they decided to settle there. They were
uncertain whether it would be proper for them to marry, so
they asked the sun as it rose the next morning. The sun
answered immediately that they may marry. A few months
later, the wife conceived, but she delivered only two
abortions. They threw these in the river. One went straight
down and became the ancestor of fish, and the other swam
across and gave rise to crabs. Next morning, the brother
asked the moon why their offspring should be fish and
crabs. The moon answered that marriage between brother and
sister is strictly prohibited, but as they can find no
other mates, they must place a mat between them in their
marriage bed. They heeded this advice, and the wife soon
gave birth to a stone. They were again distraught and were
about to throw the stone in the river, but the moon told
them they must care for it nevertheless. Later, they
settled in a rich land called Arapanai, and in time the
brother died. Pitying the woman's loneliness, the moon told
her that she would soon have companions. Just five days
later, the stone swelled up and four children came from it,
some shod and some barefoot. Those with shoes were probably
the ancestors of the Chinese. [Frazer, pp. 227-229]
A brother and sister escaped a great deluge in a wooden
mortar. They landed on a high mountain, married, had
children, and founded the village of Popkok in a hollow of
the hills, where they thought themselves safe from another
deluge. [Gaster, p. 104]