The gods, led by Enlil, agreed to cleanse the earth of
an overpopulated humanity, but Utnapishtim was warned by
the god Ea in a dream. He and some craftsmen built a large
boat (one acre in area, seven decks) in a week. He then
loaded it with his family, the craftsmen, and "the seed of
all living creatures." The waters of the abyss rose up, and
it stormed for six days. Even the gods were frightened by
the flood's fury. Upon seeing all the people killed, the
gods repented and wept. The waters covered everything but
the top of the mountain Nisur, where the boat landed. Seven
days later, Utnapishtim released a dove, but it returned
finding nowhere else to land. He next returned a sparrow,
which also returned, and then a raven, which did not
return. Thus he knew the waters had receded enough for the
people to emerge. Utnapishtim made a sacrifice to the gods.
He and his wife were given immortality and lived at the end
of the earth. [Sandars, chpt. 5]
Sharur destroyed Asag, demon of sickness and disease, by
flooding his abode. In the process, "The primeval waters of
Kur rose to the surface, and as a result of their violence
no fresh waters could reach the fields and gardens." [Kramer, p. 105]