A woman gave birth to four monsters. Though advised to
kill them, she let them grow. They grew quickly and acted
evilly, and before long they were too large and powerful to
kill. They kept growing. One night they came together in
the camp with their backs together and grew together into
one creature, which grew tall enough to touch the sky. Most
people took refuge at their base, where they couldn't bend
over and reach them; others were caught by the monsters'
long arms and eaten. One man who could see the future heard
a voice telling him to plant a hollow reed. He did so, and
it quickly grew very big. The voice directed the man and
his wife to go naked into the reed, taking pairs of good
animals, when they see all the birds of the world flying
south. The sign came and they entered. Rain came, and
waters rose to cover everything but the top of the reed and
the heads of the monsters. Turtle destroyed the monsters by
digging under them and uprooting them. They broke apart and
fell in (and thus formed) the four cardinal directions. The
waters subsided, and winds dried the earth. The people and
animals emerged onto a barren earth, and the wife wondered
how they would live. The man said, "Go to sleep." Four
times they slept, and each time they woke there was more
growth around them. After the fourth night, they awoke in a
grass hut, and there was a stalk of corn outside. The voice
told them corn was to be their holy food. If they plant
corn and something else comes up, then the world will end.
The voice didn't return after that. [Erdoes & Ortiz, p. 120-122]