The god Chronos in a vision warned Xisuthrus, the tenth
king of Babylon, of a flood coming on the fifteenth day of
the month of Daesius. The god ordered him to write a
history and bury it in Sippara, and told him to build and
provision a vessel (5 stadia by 2 stadia) for himself, his
friends and relations, and all kinds of animals. Xisuthrus
asked where he should sail, and Chronos answered, "to the
gods, but first pray for all good things to men." Xisuthrus
built a ship five furlongs by two furlongs and loaded it as
ordered. After the flood had come and abated somewhat, he
sent out some birds, which returned. Later, he tried again,
and the birds returned with mud on their feet. On the third
trial, the birds didn't return. He saw that land had
appeared above the waters, so he parted some seams of his
ship, saw the shore, and drove his ship aground in the
Corcyraean mountains in Armenia. He disembarked with his
wife, daughter, and pilot, and offered sacrifices to the
gods. Those four were translated to live with the gods. The
others at first were grieved when they could not find the
four, but they heard Xisuthrus' voice in the air telling
them to be pious and to seek his writings at Sippara. Part
of the ship remains to this day, and some people make
charms from its bitumen. [Frazer, pp.
108-110; G. Smith, pp. 42-43]
According to accounts attributed to Berosus, the
antediluvians were giants who became impious and depraved,
except one among them that reverenced the gods and was wise
and prudent. His name was Noa, and he dwelt in Syria with
his three sons Sem, Japet, Chem, and their wives Tidea,
Pandora, Noela, and Noegla. From the stars, he foresaw
destruction, and he began building an ark. 78 years after
he began building, the oceans, inland seas, and rivers
burst forth from beneath, attended by many days of violent
rain. The waters overflowed all the mountains, and the
human race was drowned except Noa and his family who
survived on his ship. The ship came to rest at last on the
top of the Gendyae or Mountain. Parts of it still remain,
which men take bitumen from to make charms against evil.
[H. Miller, pp. 291-292]