The Supreme Sovereign ordered the water god Gong Gong to
create a flood as punishment and warning for human
misbehavior. Gong Gong extended the flood for 22 years, and
people had to live in high mountain caves and in trees,
fighting with wild animals for scarce resources. Unable to
persuade the Supreme Sovereign to stop the flood, and told
by an owl and a turkey about _Xirang_ or Growing Soil, the
supernatural hero Gun stole Growing Soil from heaven to dam
the waters. Before Gun was finished, however, the Supreme
Sovereign sent the fire god Zhu Rong to execute him for his
theft. The Growing Soil was taken back to heaven, and the
floods continued. However, Gun's body didn't decay, and
when it was cut apart three years later, his son Yu emerged
in the form of a horned dragon. Gun's body also transformed
into a dragon at that time and thenceforth lived quietly in
the deeps. The Supreme Sovereign was fearful of Yu's power,
so he cooperated and gave Yu the Growing Soil and the use
of the dragon Ying. Yu led other gods to drive away Gong
Gong, distributed the Growing Soil to remove most of the
flood, and led the people to fashion rivers from Ying's
tracks and thus channel the remaining floodwaters to the
sea. [Walls, pp. 94-100]
The goddess Nu Kua fought and defeated the chief of a
neighboring tribe, driving him up a mountain. The chief,
chagrined at being defeated by a woman, beat his head
against the Heavenly Bamboo with the aim of wreaking
vengeance on his enemies and killing himself. He knocked it
down, tearing a hole in the sky. Floods poured out,
inundating the world and killing everyone but Nu Kua and
her army; her divinity made her and her followers safe from
it. Nu Kua patched the hole with a plaster made from stones
of five different colors, and the floods ceased. [Werner, p. 225; Vitaliano, p. 163]