When the deluge came, Pawpaw Nan-chaung and his sister
Chang-hko saved themselves in a large boat. They took with
them nine cocks and nine needles. When the storm and rain
had passed, they each day threw out one cock and one needle
to see whether the waters were falling. On the ninth day,
they finally heard the cock crow and the needle strike
bottom. They left their boat, wandered about, and came to a
cave home of two nats or elves. The elves bade them
stay and make themselves useful, which they did. Soon the
sister gave birth, and the old elfin woman minded the baby
while its parents were away at work. The old woman, who was
a witch, disliked the infant's squalling, and one day took
it to a place where nine roads met, cut it to pieces, and
scattered its blood and body about. She carried some of the
tidbits back to the cave, made it into a curry, and tricked
the mother into eating it. When the mother learned this,
she fled to the crossroads and cried to the Great Spirit to
return her child and avenge its death. The Great Spirit
told her he couldn't restore her baby, but he would make
her mother of all nations of men. Then, from each road,
people of different nations sprang up from the fragments of
the murdered babe. [Gaster, pp.
97-98]