As in the Huichol myth, a woodman was warned of a coming
flood by a woman. He was bidden to take the woodpecker,
sandpiper, and parrot with him, as well as the bitch. He
embarked at midnight as the flood began. When the flood
subsided, he waited five days and sent out the sandpiper,
which came back and cried, "Ee-wee-wee", indicating the
earth was too wet to walk upon. He waited five more days
and sent out the woodpecker, which found the trees too soft
and returned saying "Chu-ee, chu-ee!" He waited five days
more and sent out the sandpiper, who reported back that the
ground was hard, and the man ventured out. He lived with
the bitch who, as above, transformed into a human wife. [Gaster, p. 124]
Survivors of the flood escaped in a canoe. God sent the
vulture out to see if the earth was dry enough, but the
vulture didn't return because it was devouring the drowned
corpses. God cursed the vulture and made it black, leaving
its wingtips white to remind people of its former color.
Next, God sent the ringdove, who reported that the land was
dry but the rivers were in spate. So God commanded the
animals to drink the rivers dry. All came and drank except
the weeping dove, which today still goes to drink at
nightfall because she is ashamed to be seen drinking by
day. [Gaster, p. 124]