The great god Ndengei had a favorite bird, called
Turukawa, which would wake him every morning. His two
grandsons killed the bird and buried it to hide the crime.
Ndengei sent his messenger Utu to find the bird. The first
search proved fruitless, but a second search exposed the
grandsons' guilt. Rather than apologizing, they fled to the
mountains and took refuge with some carpenters, who built a
strong stockade to keep Ndengei at bay. In their fortress,
the rebels withstood Ndengei's armies for three months, but
then Ndengei caused the earth to be flooded with rain. The
rebels sat securely as the surrounding lands were
submerged, until the waters reached their walls. They
prayed to another god for direction, and they were brought
canoes (or taught how to make them) by Rokoro, the god of
carpenters, and his foreman Rokola. (By other accounts,
they were instructed to make floats out of the shaddock
fruit, or they floated in bowls.) They floated around
picking up other survivors. The receding tide left a total
of eight survivors on the island of Mbengha. Two tribes
were destroyed completely--one consisting entirely of women
and the other with tails like dogs. The natives of Mbengha
claim to rank highest of all the Fijians. [Kelsen, p. 131; Gaster, p. 106]