When a storm came up, two sisters who were gathering
shellfish swore at Namarangini, the spirit man who sang up
the rain. He heard, grabbed the younger sister, and tried
unsuccessfully to copulate with her while the older sister
beat him with a branch. He took her to the hut at his camp,
made a fire, and tried again, but he discovered there was a
cycad nut grinding stone in her vagina. He removed it with
her stick for beating cycad nuts, and then he copulated
with her easily. When they had finished, she made herself
into a fly and returned to her husband. Her husband
discovered the stone was missing, and he killed her by
pushing a heated stick through her vagina into her stomach.
The next morning, the other sister discovered that she was
dead and knew that her husband had killed her. The Fly and
Sandfly women cried for their sister and beat her husband,
driving him away. He died and turned into a certain
milkwood tree. When the women cried, rain fell heavily and
continued falling for several weeks. They made bark rafts.
A rush of water from inland washed them out to sea, to
Elcho and other islands. At sea, you can still hear them
crying. Women lost their grinding stones from their vagina
when the flood washed them out to sea. [Berndt & Berndt, pp. 287-289]