Men once lived forever and knew no troubles. The earth
brought forth fine fruits, flesh grew on trees, and milk
and wine flowed in many rivers. One day, and old man came
to the country and asked for a night's lodging, which a
couple gave him in their cottage. When he departed the next
day, he said he would return in nine days. He gave his host
a small fish in a vessel and said he would reward the host
if he did not eat the fish but returned it then. The wife
thought the fish must be exceptionally good to eat, but the
husband said he had promised the old man to keep it and
made the woman swear not to eat it. After two days of
thinking about it, though, the wife yielded to temptation
and threw the fish on the hot coals. Immediately, she was
struck dead by lightning, and it began to rain. The rivers
started overflowing the country. On the ninth day, the old
man returned and told his host that all living things would
be drowned, but since he had kept his oath, he would be
saved. The old man told the host to take a wife, gather his
kinfolk, and build a boat on which to save them, animals,
and seeds of trees and herbs. The man did all this. It
rained a year, and the waters covered everything. After a
year, the waters sank, and the people and animals
disembarked. They now had to labor to gain a living, and
sickness and death came also. They multiplied slowly so
that many thousands of years passed before people were
again as numerous as they were before the flood. [Frazer, pp. 177-178]