Manu, the first human, found a small fish in his
washwater. The fish begged protection from the larger
fishes, in return for which it would save Manu. Manu kept
the fish safe, transferring it to larger and larger
reservoirs as it grew, eventually taking it to the ocean.
The fish warned Manu of a coming deluge and told him to
build a ship. When the flood rose, the fish came, and Manu
tied the craft to its horn. The fish led him to a northern
mountain and told Manu to tie the ship's rope to a tree to
prevent it from drifting. Manu, alone of all creatures,
survived. He made offerings of clarified butter, sour milk,
whey, and curds. From these, a woman arose, calling herself
Manu's daughter. Whatever blessings he invoked through her
were granted him. Through her, he generated this race. [Gaster, pp. 94-95; Kelsen, p. 128; Brinton, pp. 227-228]
The great sage Manu, son of Vivasvat, practiced austere
fervor. He stood on one leg with upraised arm, looking down
unblinkingly, for 10,000 years. While so engaged on the
banks of the Chirini, a fish came to him and asked to be
saved from larger fish. Manu took the fish to a jar and, as
the fish grew, from thence to a large pond, then to the
river Ganga, then to the ocean. Though large, the fish was
pleasant and easy to carry. Upon being released into the
ocean, the fish told Manu that soon all terrestrial objects
would be dissolved in the time of the purification. It told
him to build a strong ship with a cable attached and to
embark with the seven sages (rishis) and certain
seeds, and to then watch for the fish, since the waters
could not be crossed without it. Manu embarked as enjoined
and thought on the fish. The fish, knowing his desire,
came, and Manu fastened the ship's cable to its horn. The
fish dragged the ship through roiling waters for many
years, at last bringing it to the highest peak of Himavat,
which is still known as Naubandhana ("the Binding of the
Ship"). The fish then revealed itself as Parjapati Brahma
and said Manu shall create all living things and all things
moving and fixed. Manu performed a great act of austere
fervor to clear his uncertainty and then began calling
things into existence. [Frazer, pp.
185-187]
The heroic king Manu, son of the Sun, practiced austere
fervor in Malaya and attained transcendent union with the
Deity. After a million years, Brahma bestowed on Manu a
boon and asked him to choose it. Manu asked for the power
to preserve all existing things upon the dissolution of the
universe. Later, while offering oblations in his hermitage,
a carp fell in his hands, which Manu preserved. The fish
grew and cried to Manu to preserve it, and Manu moved it to
progressively larger vessels, eventually moving it to the
river Ganga and then to the ocean. When it filled the
ocean, Manu recognized it as the god Janardana, or Brahma.
It told Manu that the end of the yuga was
approaching, and soon all would be covered with water. He
was to preserve all creatures and plants aboard a ship
which had been prepared. It said that a hundred years of
drought and famine would begin this day, which would be
followed by fires from the sun and from underground that
would consume the earth and the ether, destroying this
world, the gods, and the planets. Seven clouds from the
steam of the fire will inundate the earth, and the three
worlds will be reduced to one ocean. Manu's ship alone will
remain, fastened by a rope to the great fish's horn. Having
announced all this, the great being vanished. The deluge
occurred as stated; Janardana appeared in the form of a
horned fish, and the serpent Ananta came in the form of a
rope. Manu, by contemplation, drew all creatures towards
him and stowed them in the ship and, after making obeisance
to Janardana, attached the ship to the fish's horn with the
serpent-rope. [Frazer, pp.
188-190]
At the end of the past kalpa, the demon Hayagriva
stole the sacred books from Brahma, and the whole human
race became corrupt except the seven Nishis, and especially
Satyavrata, the prince of a maritime region. One day when
he was bathing in a river, he was visited by a fish which
craved protection and which he transferred to successively
larger vessels as it grew. At last Satyavrata recognized it
as the god Vishnu, "The Lord of the Universe." Vishnu told
him that in seven days all the corrupt creatures will be
destroyed by a deluge, but Satyavrata would be saved in a
large vessel. He was told to take aboard the miraculous
vessel all kinds of medicinal herbs, food esculant grains,
the seven Nishis and their wives, and pairs of brute
animals. After seven days, the oceans began to overflow the
coasts and constant rain began flooding the earth. A large
vessel floated in on the rising waters, and Satyavrata and
the Nishis entered with their wives and cargo. During the
deluge, Vishnu preserved the ark by again taking the form
of a giant fish and tying the ark to himself with a huge
sea serpent. When the waters subsided, he slew the demon
who had stolen the holy books and communicated their
contents to Satyavrata. [H. Miller,
pp. 289-290; Howey, pp. 389-390; Frazer, pp. 191-193]
One windy day, the sea flooded the port city of
Dwaravati. All its occupants perished except Krishna, an
avatar of Vishnu, and his brother Balarama, who were
walking in the forests of Raivataka Hill. Krishna left his
brother alone. Sesha, the serpent who supports the world,
withdrew his energy from Balarama; in a jet of light,
Balarama's spirit entered the sea, and his body fell over.
Krishna decided that tomorrow he would destroy the world
for all its evils, and he went to sleep. Jara the hunter
passed by, mistook Krishna's foot for the face of a stag,
and shot it. The wound to Krishna's foot was slight, but
Jara found Krishna dead. He had saffron robes, four arms,
and a jewel on his breast. The waters still rose and soon
lapped at Jara's feet. Jara felt ashamed but helpless; he
left deciding never to speak of the incident. [Buck, pp. 408-409]