The people repeatedly became distant from Sotuknang, the
creator. Twice he destroyed the world (by fire and by cold)
and recreated it while the few people who still lived by
the laws of creation took shelter underground with the
ants. When people became corrupt and warlike a third time,
Sotuknang guided the ones who had retained their wisdom to
Spider Woman, who cut down giant reeds and sheltered the
people in the hollow stems with a little water and food.
Sotuknang caused a great flood with rain and waves, and the
people floated in their reeds for a long time. Finally,
they came to rest on a small piece of land, and Spider
Woman unsealed their reeds and pulled them out by the tops
of their heads. They still had as much food as they started
with. They sent out birds to find more land, but to no
avail. They grew a tall reed and climbed it, but they saw
only water. But guided by their inner wisdom (which comes
from Sotuknang through the door at the top of their head),
the people traveled on, using the reeds as canoes. They
went northeast, finding progressively larger islands. The
last of these was large and fruitful, and people wanted to
stay there, but Spider Woman urged them on. They went
further northeast, paddling hard as if going uphill, until
they came to the Fourth World. The shores were rocky with
seemingly no place to land, but by opening the doors at the
tops of their head, they found a current that took them to
a sandy beach. Sotuknang appeared and told them to look
back, and they saw the islands, the last remnants of the
Third World, sink into the ocean. [Waters, pp. 12-20]
Spider Clan, Blue Flute Clan, Fire Clan, Snake Clan, and
Sun Clan traveled together on the Hopi migrations. On their
northward journey, they were blocked at the Arctic Circle
by a mountain of ice and snow. This was the Back Door of
the Fourth World, which Sotuknang said was closed to them.
Spider Woman and the Spider Clan, however, urged them to go
on, and all the clans used their powers to try to melt and
bread down the mountain. They tried four times but failed.
Sotuknang told Spider Woman that if they had succeeded, the
melted snow and ice would have flooded the world. He
punished her by letting her grow old and ugly, and Spider
Clan became breeders of wickedness. [Waters, pp. 39-40]