A man clearing fields found the trees regrown overnight.
On the fifth day of this, he found that the Grandmother
Nakawe, goddess of the earth, did this, because she wanted
to talk to him. She told him that he was working in vain
because a flood was coming in five days. Per her
instructions, he built a box from the fig tree and entered
it with five grains of corn and beans of each color, fire
with five squash stems to feed it, and a black bitch. (In
other versions, the vessel was a canoe.) She closed him in
and caulked the cracks, and he floated in the flood for
five years, first floating south, then north, then west,
then east, then rising upward as the whole world flooded.
Finally the box came to rest on a mountain near Santa
Cantarina, where it can still be seen. The world was still
under water, but parrots and macaws pulled up mountains and
created valleys to drain the water, and the land dried. The
old woman, who had sat upon the box with a macaw during the
flood, turned to wind and disappeared. The man lived with
the bitch in a cave. Every evening he would return home
from work in the fields to find meals prepared. He spied
one day and found that the bitch took off her skin and
became a woman to do the work. He threw her skin into the
fire. She whined like a dog, but he bathed her in nixtamal
water, and she remained a woman. They repopulated the
earth. [Gaster, pp. 122-123; Horcasitas, pp. 203-205]