Birds flew all over the world collecting things that
decayed and threw them in a great kettle of water that
boiled in sun. (The hard parukuba wood they left
alone.) The storks waited around the kettle and snatched up
things when they appeared on the surface of the boiling
water. When the water was getting low, Mayuruberu, the
chief of storks and creator of all birds, threw a round
stone in the kettle. This upset the kettle, and its hot
liquid poured over the world and burned up almost
everything, including even water. Mankind survived, but all
plants were destroyed except the cassia. The sloth, an
ancestor of the Ipurina, climbed the cassia tree to fetch
fruits, as there was nothing else to eat. At that time, the
sun and moon were hidden. The first kernel that the sloth
threw down fell on hard ground, and the sun appeared again,
but it was very small. The second kernel he threw fell in
water, and the sun grew larger. As the third kernel fell in
deeper water, the sun grew more, and so on until the sun
reached its present size. Then the sloth asked Mayuruberu
for seeds of crops. Mayuruberu appeared with many new
plants, and the Ipurina began tilling their fields.
Mayuruberu ate anyone who would not work. The kettle still
stands in the sun, but it is empty. [Frazer, pp. 259-260; Kelsen, p. 139]