From the time of creation, people's lives were happy and
peaceful, but one year a great flood came. The parents of
Mahei and Maniu, twin brother and sister, felled a big
tree, hollowed it out, and covered both ends with cowhide.
They attached brass bells to the outside, and inside they
put grain and seed, the two children, and a knife and cake
of beeswax. They instructed the children not to come out
until the flood had gone down. The flood came, and the
children floated for an undeterminable period. Mahei got
impatient and cut a small hole with the knife. He saw muddy
waves surging and dead bodies everywhere, and he closed the
hole with wax. Later, Maniu cut a hole and saw nothing but
water; she likewise filled the hole. Finally, they heard
the bells ringing, indicating they had touched ground, and
they left the drum. They were the only survivors. When they
got old, they realized that there would be no people left
if they died. Mahei suggested marriage, but his sister was
ashamed to marry her brother. Mahei suggested she consult
the magic tree. Maniu went there, but Mahei took a shortcut
and hid behind the tree. Disguising his voice, he answered
Maniu that she should marry her brother. They did so, but
by then they were too old to have children. The sole gourd
seed they had carried in the wooden drum had grown
profusely, and although most of the fruits dried and
rotted, one stayed ripe. They had hung it in their shed.
One day, they heard faint voices coming from the gourd.
They heated their fire tongs red hot to burn a hole in the
gourd, but each time they tried, a voice said "Don't burn
me!" Finally, one voice, calling herself Grandma Apierer,
said to burn her or none could get out. They burnt a hole
in the navel on the gourd's bottom. First out was Apo,
ancestor of the Konge people; his skin was darkened by the
soot around the hole. The next out, in order, were Han,
Dai, and last of all Jino (which literally means "last
squeeze"); they became ancestors of their people. Since
then, rice offerings have been made to Apierer, who gave
her life so that the Jino might live. [L.
Miller, pp. 68-73]