In the beginning, there was no land, and Xowalaci (The
Giver) and his companion lived in a sweat house on the
water. One day, white land appeared and expanded on the
waters. Xowalaci made it solid by blowing tobacco smoke on
it. He made more solid land by dropping five mud cakes into
the ocean and telling them to expand when they hit the
bottom. When he stepped on the new land, it became solid.
He looked on the sand of the new land and saw a man's
tracks, seemingly coming from the north and leading into
the water to the south. This worried him, and he told the
water to overflow the land he had created from the mud and
to recede again. But he found more tracks again, coming
from the west, so he caused a second flood. He repeated the
process five times with no different results. Finally he
gave up and said, "This is going to make trouble in the
future!" and there has been trouble in the world since
then. Then Xowalaci tried to make people. He formed figures
from grass and mud, ordered a house to appear, and gave the
figures to his companion to put in the house. Dogs arose
from this creation attempt. He tried again using white
sand, but those figures gave rise to snakes. He attributed
these failures to the footprints. The world became
inhabited by dogs and snakes. He crushed the ten biggest
snakes in baskets of mixed fresh and salt water and threw
them in the ocean. Two bad snakes got away to give rise to
today's snake-like animals. Xowalaci ordered those two to
encircle the world and hold it together. He also crushed
five bad dogs and threw them in a ditch. They gave rise to
water monsters. Soon after, his companion smoked for three
days and created a house from which a woman emerged.
Xowalaci told his companion to be her husband. Xowalaci
straightened out the world, made more animals, and went up
into the sky, saying as he went that the companion, his
wife, and their sixteen children would speak different
languages and become progenitors of the different tribes.
[Sproul, pp. 232-236; von Franz, p. 174]