Blue-jay advised a maiden to marry a panther, who was a
hunter and chief of his town. She went to his town but
married Beaver by mistake. When Beaver returned from
fishing, he told her to gather the trout he had caught, but
she discovered they were not trout but willow branches.
Disgusted, she ran away from him and finally married the
panther. Beaver wept for five days, flooding the land with
his tears. The animals escaped to their canoes. When the
flood nearly reached the sky, they thought to fetch up some
earth. They told Blue-jay to dive, but his dive was so
shallow that his tail remained above water. Mink tried
next, and then otter, but they could not reach the bottom.
When muskrat's turn came, he told the people to tie the
canoes together and lay planks across them. Muskrat threw
off his blanket, sang his song five times, and dove. He was
down a long time, but at last flags came up to the surface.
Summer came, the water sank, and the canoes grounded. As
the animals jumped out of the canoes, they broke off their
tails against the gunwale. But otter, mink, muskrat, and
panther reattached their tails, so they have long tails
today. [Frazer, pp. 325-326; Kelsen, p. 148]