A son was borne to a fairy and a laurel tree; the fairy
returned to heaven when the boy was seven years old. One
day, rains came and lasted for many months, flooding the
earth with a raging sea. The laurel, in danger of falling,
told his son to ride him when it came uprooted by the
waves. The boy did so, floating on the tree for many days.
One day a crowd of ants floated by and cried out to be
saved. After asking the tree for permission, the boy gave
them refuge on the branches of the laurel. Later, a group
of mosquitoes flew by and also asked to be saved. Again,
the boy asked the tree for permission, was granted it, and
gave the mosquitoes rest. Then another boy floated by and
asked to be saved. This time the tree refused permission
when its son asked. The son asked twice more, and after the
third time the tree said, "Do what you like," and the son
rescued the other boy. At last the tree came to rest on the
summit of a mountain. The insects expressed their gratitude
and left. The two boys, being very hungry, went and found a
house where an old woman lived with her own daughter and a
foster-daughter. As everyone else in the world had perished
and the subsiding waters allowed farming again, the woman
decided to marry her daughters to the boys, her own going
to the cleverer boy. The second boy maliciously told the
woman that the other boy could quickly gather millet grains
scattered on sand. The woman tested this claim, and the
first boy despaired of ever succeeding, when the ants came
to his aid, filling the grain bag in a few minutes. The
other boy had watched, and he told the woman that the task
hadn't been done by the first boy himself, so the woman
still couldn't decide which daughter to marry to which boy.
She decided to let the boys decide by chance, going to one
room or another in total darkness. A mosquito came and told
the Son of the Tree which room the old woman's daughter was
in, so those two were married, and the second boy married
the foster-daughter. The human race is descended from those
two couples. [Zong, pp. 16-18]
Young Gim's father was killed by robbers, and Gim set
out to track them and get revenge. On the way, he met
another bereaved boy hunting the same robbers. They became
sworn brothers, but they were separated when a storm upset
their ferry as they were crossing a river. Gim was rescued
by another boy who had been orphaned by the same robbers.
They too swore to be brothers but were separated when their
ferry sank in a storm. Gim was rescued and hidden by an old
woman; he was on the island of the robbers but was helpless
from his injuries. One day a mysterious man came by and
asked Gim to go with him. Gim lived with the man in the
mountains studying magic until he was sixteen, whereupon
the man told him to go and rescue the king from the
robbers, and that he would meet Gim again in three years
exactly. Gim set out, finding a magic horse, arms, and
armor along the way, and arrived at the king's castle when
it was on the point of surrender. In the enemy camp, he
found a black face belching fire at the castle, a genii
studying astrology, a rat whose swinging tail produced a
flood which threatened the castle, and a giant who hurled
flames at the King's camp. Gim fought them with his magic
but was overwhelmed by their numbers. He fled with the king
to an island, but the rat tried to submerge it with an even
greater flood from its tail. A butterfly led Gim to a
cavern in a distant mountain, where he met the first boy he
had encountered. They went back to fight together, but the
other boy was killed and the island submerged, and Gim and
the King retreated to a second island. Gim was led by a
crow to another cavern in the mountains where he met his
other friend. They returned to fight, but again the friend
was killed, the island submerged, and Gim and the King had
to retreat. When a third island was threatened with the
flood, they took refuge on a ship. Gim's mentor then came
(three years having elapsed) and with his magic called down
thunderbolts which destroyed all of the enemy. Gim went to
the enemy island, found his mother, and married the sister
of his second friend. [Zong, pp.
62-66]
The River Dedong flooded the countryside. An old man in
Pyongyang, rowing about in a boat, found and rescued a
deer, a snake, and a boy from the waters. He carried them
to shore and released them, but the boy had lost his
parents in the flood and so became the man's adopted son.
One day the deer came and led the man to a buried treasure
of gold and silver, and the man became rich. The foster-son
became reckless with the money, and he and his father
argued. The boy accused the man of theft, and the man was
imprisoned. The snake came to him in his cell and bit his
arm, which then swelled painfully. But then the snake
returned with a small bottle. The man applied the medicine
to his arm, which cured it at once. In the morning, he
heard that the magistrate's wife was dying of a snakebite,
so he sent word that he could cure her. This he did with
the snake's ointment. He was released, and the foster-son
was arrested and punished. [Zong, pp.
94-95]
A foundling infant grew up incredibly fast and soon
showed signs of fantastic strength. He earned the name
"Iron-shoes" from the footwear he needed. He set out on a
journey and met with and joined three other extraordinary
men--"Nose-wind", who had extraordinarily powerful breath;
"Long-rake", who crumbled mountains with his rake, and
"Waterfall", who made rivers by pissing. They went to an
old woman's home and were invited to spend the night, but
the woman locked them in, and the men realized that she and
her four sons were tigers in disguise. The tigers tried to
kill them by roasting the room, but Nose-wind kept it cool
by his blowing. The next day, the woman challenged them to
a contest of gathering pine trees while her sons stacked
them. When it became clear that the four brothers ripped up
the trees faster than the tigers could stack them, the
woman set fire to the logs. Waterfall, though, made water
which not only put out the fire, but created a flood that
nearly drowned the tigers. Nose-wind blew on the water and
froze it. Iron-shoes skated out and kicked the heads off
the tigers, and Long-rake broke up the ice and threw it far
and wide, eliminating any trace of the flood. [Zong, pp. 162-166]