In the world before this one, the people didn't know how
to behave or how to act human, and the creating power was
displeased. He placed three dry buffalo chips under a
sacred pipe rack and saved a fourth for lighting the pipe.
He sang three songs to bring rain, which caused the rivers
to overflow; then he sang a fourth song and stamped on the
earth. The earth split open, and water flowed from the
cracks and covered everything. The Creating Power floated
on the sacred pipe and his huge pipe bag. All people and
animals were destroyed except Kangi, the crow. It was very
tired and three times asked the Creating Power to make a
place for it to rest. The Creating Power opened his pipe
bag, which contained all manner of animals and birds, and
selected four known for their diving abilities. He sang a
song and commanded the loon to dive and bring up mud, but
the loon failed. Likewise, the water was too deep for otter
and beaver. But the turtle succeeded in bringing up a
little mud. The Creating Power took the mud and, singing,
spread it out on the water. After the fourth song, there
was enough land for himself and the crow. He waved two long
eagle feathers over the ground, and it spread until it
replaced the water. He named it the Turtle Continent. The
Creating Power thought, "Land without water is not good,"
and wept for the earth and the creatures he would put upon
it. His tears became oceans, streams, and lakes. He
scattered the animals across the land; they came to life
when he stamped on the ground. He created four colors of
people from red, white, black, and yellow earth. He created
the rainbow as a sign that there would be no more great
flood, but warned that he had destroyed the first world by
fire because it was bad, and the second world by flood, and
he would destroy this world too if people make it bad and
ugly. [Erdoes & Ortiz, pp.
496-499]
Unktehi, a water monster, fought the people and caused a
great flood. The people retreated to a hill, but the water
swept over them, killing them all. The blood gelled and
turned to pipestone. (Pipes made from that rock are sacred
today.) Unktehi was also turned to stone; her bones are in
the Badlands now, forming a long ridge. A giant eagle,
Wanblee Galeshka, swept down, saved one girl from the
flood, carrying her to a tree on the highest pinnacle, the
only place not covered by water. He made her his wife. She
bore twins, a boy and a girl, which are the ancestors of
the Sioux. [Erdoes & Ortiz, pp.
93-95]
Unktehi puffed up her body to make the Missouri
overflow, and the little water monsters, her children, did
the same with other streams and lakes. This caused a great
flood which covered the country. Only a few people escaped
to the highest mountain, and the waves threatened to kill
them. The thunderbirds liked people, so they fought the
water monsters for several years. In time, it became clear
that the thunderbirds were losing when they fought close,
so they retreated to the sky and, all together, sent their
lightning bolts. This burned the forests, boiled the water,
and turned the earth red hot, except where the people had
taken refuge. Unktehi and the water monsters were defeated.
Their bones can still be seen in the Badlands. [Erdoes & Ortiz, pp. 220-222]