A man called the Mariner (Etroetchokren) was the
first person to build a canoe. One day, he rocked it side
to side, causing waves which flooded the earth and
floundering the canoe. He scrambled into a giant hollow
straw that floated past, caulked up the ends, and floated
safely until the flood dried. He landed on a high mountain,
called the Place of the Old Man today, near Fort MacPherson
in the Rockies. The Mariner straddled a rapid stretch of
the Yukon River and, dipping with his hands, drew out dead
bodies of men as they floated past, but he found none
living. The only living thing he saw was a raven high on a
rock, gorged with food and fast asleep. The Mariner climbed
to the raven, grabbed it, and stuck it in his sack. The
raven begged not to be cast down, saying the man would find
no other surviving men without the raven's help. The man
dropped the bag anyway, and the bird was dashed to pieces.
But though the man searched far and wide, he could find
nothing else living except a loach and a pike sunning
themselves on the mud. He went back to the raven,
reassembled its bones, and blew on them to restore the
flesh and return the raven to life. They returned to the
beach, and the raven told the man to bore a hole in the
belly of the pike, while it did the same to the loach. A
crowd of men emerged from the hole in the pike, and women
came out of the loach. [Frazer, pp.
315-316]