Tumbainot, a righteous man, had a wife named Naipande
and three sons, Oshomo, Bartimaro, and Barmao. When his
brother Lengerni died, Tumbainot, according to custom,
married the widow Nahaba-logunja, who bore him three more
sons, but they argued about her refusal to give him a drink
of milk in the evening, and she set up her own homestead.
The world was heavily populated in those days, but the
people were sinful and not mindful of God. However, they
refrained from murder, until at last a man named Nambija
hit another named Suage on the head. At this, God resolved
to destroy mankind, except Tumbainot found grace in His
eyes. God commanded Tumbainot to build an ark of wood and
enter it with his two wives, six sons and their wives, and
some of animals of every sort. When they were all aboard
and provisioned, God caused a great long rain which caused
a flood, and all other men and beasts drowned. The ark
drifted for a long time, and provisions began to run low.
The rain finally stopped, and Tumbainot let loose a dove to
ascertain the state of the flood. The dove returned tired,
so Tumbainot knew it had found no place to rest. Several
days later, he loosed a vulture, but first he attached an
arrow to one of its tail feathers so that, if the bird
landed, the arrow would hook on something and be lost. The
vulture returned that evening without the arrow, so
Tumbainot reasoned that it must have landed on carrion, and
that the flood was receding. When the water ran away, the
ark grounded on the steppe, and its occupants disembarked.
Tumbainot saw four rainbows, one in each quarter of the
sky, signifying that God's wrath was over. [Frazer, pp. 330-331]