Messou was hunting with his dogs, when his dogs got
caught in a large lake. He couldn't find them until a bird
told him that it had seen the lost dogs in the lake. Messou
entered the lake to rescue them, but the lake overflowed,
covered the land, and destroyed the world. Messou sent
first a raven and then an otter to find a piece of earth,
but neither could find any. He next sent down a muskrat,
which dived and returned with just a tiny amount of land,
but enough for Messou to form the land we are on. Messou
fired arrows into the trunks of trees, and the arrows
turned into branches. He took revenge on those who had
detained his dogs. He married the muskrat and by it peopled
the world. [Brinton, p. 225]
Being angry with giants, God commanded a man to build a
large canoe. The man did so, and when he embarked, the
water rose till no land was visible anywhere. Weary of
seeing nothing but water, the man threw an otter into it.
The otter dived and brought up a little mud, which the man
breathed on and caused to expand. He placed the earth on
the water and prevented it from sinking. After awhile, he
placed reindeer on the new island, but they completed a
circuit of the island quickly, so he concluded it wasn't
yet large enough. He continued to blow on it and grow it so
the mountains, lakes, and rivers were formed; then he
disembarked. [Gaster, p. 117]