People in three previous ages were destroyed by being
devoured by jaguars, swept away by the wind and turned into
monkeys, and transformed into birds in a rain of fire. The
sun of 4 Water lasted 676 years; then the heavens came down
in one day, and the people were inundated and transformed
into fish. In the next age, Titlacahuan (Tezcatlipoca) told
a man known as Nata ("Our Father") and his consort Nene to
hollow out an aheuhuetl (cypress?) log and enter it during
the vigil of To√ßoztli, when the heavens would come
crashing down. He sealed them in with a single ear of corn
apiece to eat. When they had finished eating all the
kernels, they heard the water declining. They exited the
log, found a fish, and made a fire to cook it. The gods
Citlallinicue and Citlallatonac complained that someone was
smoking up the heavens. Tezcatlipoca descended, struck off
the people's heads, and reattached them over their
buttocks; they became dogs. [Markman, pp. 132-133; Frazer, pp. 274-275]
The deluge overwhelmed mankind. Only a man named Coxcox
(some call him Teocipactli) and a woman named Xochiquetzal
survived in a small bark. They landed on a mountain called
Colhuacan and had many children. These children were all
born dumb until a dove from a lofty tree gave them
languages, but different languages so that they couldn't
understand each other. [Gaster, p.
121; Horcasitas, p. 191; Vitaliano, p. 176]