The first world, where Navajos originated, was inhabited
by Insect People of twelve types. For their sins of
adultery and constant quarreling, the gods expelled them by
sending a wall of water from all directions. The Insect
People flew up into the second world, guided through a hole
in the sky by a cliff swallow. The second world was a
barren world inhabited by Swallow People. They decided to
stay anyway, but after 24 days, one of the Insect People
made love to the wife of the Swallow People's chief. They
were expelled to the third world; the white face of the
wind told them of an opening. The third world was a barren
world of Grasshopper People. Again, the Insect People were
expelled for philandering after 24 days. The red face of
the wind guided them to the hole to the fourth world. This
world was inhabited by animals and Pueblos, with whom the
Insect People coexisted peacefully. The gods made people in
human form from ears of corn, different colors of corn
becoming different tribes. The Insect People intermarried
with them, and their descendants eventually looked fully
human. In time, the men and women argued and decided to
live apart. But both groups engaged in unnatural sex acts,
and eventually the women were starving, so they got back
together. The gods were displeased by their sins, though,
and sent a wall of water upon them. The people noticed
animals running and sent cicadas to investigate. They
escaped the floodwaters by climbing into a fast-growing
reed. Cicada dug an entrance into the fifth world, which
was inhabited by grebes. The grebes said that people could
have that world if they could survive plunging arrows into
their heart. The cicadas met this challenge (they bear the
scars on their sides still), and people live in the fifth
world today. [Capinera, pp.
226-228]