Naareau the Elder created the earth, but the sky and the
earth clove together with darkeness between them, for there
was no separation. Naareau the Younger, walking on the
overside of the sky, decided to go between, and with a
spell, created a slight cleft; he tapped on the sky three
times, and on the third tap it opened. He heard breathing
within, created the First Creature, a bat, by rubbing his
fingers together, and told it to look around. The Bat
reported finding a Company of Fools and Deaf Mutes. At
Naareau's direction, the Bat landed on their foreheads and
told Naareau their names. Naareau crawled in the cleft and,
with the Bat as his guide, went to the people. Naareau told
them to push up, and the sky was lifted a little, but they
could lift it only so high since the sky was rooted to the
land. Naareau sent Naabawe, one of the people, to summon
Riiki, the conger eel. Riiki was sleeping and bit Naabawe
when he was called. Naareau made a slip-noose and took two
of Octopus's ten legs for bait (which is why octopuses have
only eight legs today). With these, Naareau caught Riiki
and told it to push up on the sky against the land. While
Riiki pushed, Great Ray, Turtle, and Octopus tore at the
roots of the sky while Naareau sang. The Company of Fools
and Deaf Mutes stood by laughing. The roots of the sky were
torn loose. The sky was pushed high and the land sank. But
the sky had no sides, so Naareau sang and pulled down its
sides so it was shaped like a bowl. The Company of Fools
and Deaf Mutes were left swimming in the sea; they became
the sea creatures. [von Franz, pp.
151-154, 170]
Tilik and Tarai, who lived near a sacred spring where
they were making the land, discovered by the taste of their
cabbage that their mother had been urinating in their food.
They exchanged the food and ate hers. In anger, she rolled
away the stone which had confined the sea, and the sea
poured out in a great flood. This was the origin of the
sea. [Roheim, p. 152]
The legendary hero Qat made a great canoe out of one of
the largest trees in a dense forest at the center of the
island of Gaua. While he worked on it, his brothers jeered
at him for building a canoe so far from the sea. When the
canoe was finished, he gathered into his canoe his family
and some of all the living creatures, down to the smallest
ant, and he fastened a cover over it. A great deluge of
rain came; the hollow in the center of the island filled
with water which broke through the hills where a great
waterfall still descends. The water carried the canoe out
to sea and out of sight. The natives say Qat took the best
of everything with him and look forward to his return. [Gaster, p. 107]