The stars are the shining eyes of the gods. A man once
went into the sky and stole one of the eyes. (The Pelew
Islanders' money is made from it.) The gods were angry at
this and came to earth to punish the theft. They disguised
themselves as ordinary men and went door-to-door begging
for food and lodging. Only one old woman received them
kindly. They told her to make a bamboo raft ready and, on
the night of the next full moon, to lie down on it and
sleep. This she did. A great storm came; the sea rose,
flooded the islands, and destroyed everyone else. The
woman, fast asleep, drifted until her hair caught on a tree
on the top of Mount Armlimui. The gods came looking for her
again after the flood ebbed, but they found her dead. So
one of the women-folk from heaven entered the body and
restored it to life. The gods begat five children by the
old woman and then returned to heaven, as did the goddess
who restored her to life. The present inhabitants of the
islands are descendants of those five children. [Gaster, pp. 112-113; Dixon, p. 257]
Before humans, one of the Kaliths (deities) named
Athndokl visited an unfriendly village and was killed by
its inhabitants. Seven friendly gods, who went searching
for him, were met with unkindness except from the woman
Milathk, who told them of the death. They resolved
vengeance by flooding the village, and suggested Milathk
save herself by preparing a raft tied to a tree by a rope.
The flood came and covered the village at the next full
moon. Milathk perished in the flood, but was recalled to
life by the oldest Obakad god. He wanted to make her
immortal but was stopped by another god, Tariit. Milathk
became the mother of mankind. [Kelsen, p. 132]