Back when the sun was closer to the earth, Coyote
foresaw the coming of a flood, gnawed down a great tree,
entered it, and sealed the opening. Montezuma, who was the
first person created by the Great Mystery, took warning
from Coyote and prepared a dugout canoe for himself atop
Monte Rosa. Only they survived the flood, which covered all
the land. They met again on the top of Monte Rosa, which
rose above the flood waters. To ascertain how much dry land
was left, the man sent Coyote to explore. Coyote reported
that there was sea to the west, south, and east, but
seemingly endless land to the north. The Great Spirit, with
the help of Montezuma, restocked the earth with men and
animals. Montezuma, with Coyote's help, taught them and led
them. Montezuma later became prideful and rebelled against
the Great Mystery, thus bringing evil into the world. The
Great Mystery raised the sun to its present height and,
with an earthquake, destroyed the tower that Montezuma was
building into the heavens, in the process changing
languages so that people could no longer understand animals
or other tribes. [Erdoes & Ortiz,
p. 487-489; Gaster, pp. 114-115]