Long ago, the middle world, of many worlds beneath the
sky, had no race of kings (the Shan). Animals emerged from
bamboos which cracked open and went to live in deep
forests. Hpi-pok and Hpi-mot came from heaven to
MÃ¶ng-hi on the Cambodia river and became the ancestors
of the Shan. But a time came when they offered no
sacrifices to their gods. Ling-lawn, the storm god, sent
large cranes to devour the people, but there were too many
people to eat all of them. He sent lions, but they could
not eat all of the people either. He send snakes, but the
people attacked and killed them. A great drought came for
the first four months of the new year, and many people died
of thirst and famine. But the storm-god had not finished
his battle. Sitting in his palace beneath a beautiful
umbrella, he called his counsellors. Kaw-hpa, Hseng-kio,
old Lao-hki, Tai-long, Bak-long, the smooth-talker
Ya-hseng-hpa, and others came and bowed down to worship.
Speaking in the language of men (Shan), they decided to
destroy the human race. They sent for Hkang-hkak, god of
streams and ponds, of alligators and water animals, and
bade him descend with the clouds and report to the
distinguished sage Lip-long. Lip-long had seen ill omens
while auguring with chicken bones and knew a calamity was
coming, so he was not surprised to hear the water-god tell
him that Ling-lawn, the storm god, would soon flood the
earth and destroy everything on it. Hkang-hkak told the
sage to build a strong raft and take a cow on it, but not
to warn anyone else, not even his wife or children.
Lip-long sorrowfully bent to his task while even his family
mocked his seemingly futile work. Fearing the gods, he
heeded the order not to warn anyone. A few days after he
finished the raft, the flood came, rushing violently. Only
Lip-long and the cow survived on the waters. He grieved to
see the bodies of his family. Thus the race of Shans
perished. Their spirits went to the mansions of heaven,
were refreshed by a meal of cold crab, and found the spirit
land a festive and charming place. Meanwhile, the stench of
corpses filled the earth. Ling-lawn sent serpents to devour
them, but there were too many to eat. In anger he wanted to
destroy the snakes, but they escaped into a cave. He sent
999,000 tigers, but they couldn't eat all the corpses,
either. More angry now, he hurled thunderbolts at the
tigers, but they too escaped into caves. Then he sent
Hsen-htam and Hpa-hpai, the gods of fire, who descended on
their horses to one of only three elevations of land. They
sent a great conflagration of fire over the entire earth.
When he saw the fire coming, Lip-long killed the cow with a
stick, cut it open with his sword, and crawled in its
belly. There he found a gourd seed. The fire swept over the
cow, and Lip-long came out. He asked Hkang-hkak what to do,
and the water god told him to plant the gourd seed on a
level plot of ground. He did so. One gourd vine grew up a
mountain and was scorched by the sun. One vine ran downward
and rotted and died from soaking in the water from the
flood. A third vine twined around bushes and trees.
Ling-lawn sent his gardener to care for it, and it bore
great fruit. Then Ling-lawn sent Sao-pang, god of the clear
sky, to prepare the earth for humans. Sao-pang dried what
remained of the flood with waves of heat. Ling-lawn broke
open a gourd with a thunderbolt, and people emerged from it
to till the land. Another bolt broke open a gourd. The
Shans therein asked god what to do, and he told them to go
and rule many lands. Other gourds were broken open to
release all kinds of animals, rivers, and plants. [Frazer, pp. 199-203]
In another version of this legend, the survivors were
the most righteous seven men and seven women, who crawled
into the dry shell of a giant gourd and survived the flood
floating in it. They emerged to replenish the drowned
earth. [Frazer, pp. 203-204]