Sussistinnako (Spider), the first being, lived in the
lower world. He drew a cross and placed magic parcels at
the east and west points, and his song brought forth from
them two women, Utset, the mother of all Indians, and
Nowutset, the mother of all other races. Spider also
created rain, thunder, lightning, and rainbow, and the
women made the sun, moon, and stars. Nowutset was the
stronger but duller of the two women, and she lost a
contest of rules. Utset slew her and cut out her heart;
thus began war in the world. People lived happily in the
lower world for eight years, but in the ninth, a flood
came. The people ascended through a reed, with Utset
leading the way. Badger and locust bored the passage
through the lower world's sky. Turkey was the last to
ascend, and the foaming flood waters touched his tail and
left their mark there to this day. Beetle was put in charge
of the sack full of stars, but out of curiosity he made a
hole in it, and the stars scattered across the heavens.
Utset managed to rescue a few with which she made
constellations. The hole through which the people emerged
is called the Shipapo. The first people, the Sia, camped
around it. They had no food, but Utset had always known the
name of corn, and she created it out of bits of her heart.
[Alexander, 1916, p. 203]