The Creator made the earth and gave four names for it --
for the sun, waters, soil and forests. He said only a few
people, with special preparation for the knowledge, should
know all four names, or the world would change too
suddenly. After a while, everyone learned the four names.
When people started talking to the trees the change came in
the form of a flood. When the people saw the flood coming,
they made a giant canoe and filled it with five people and
a male and female of all plants and animals. Water covered
everything but the summit of Kobah and Takobah (Mts. Baker
and Ranier). The canoe landed on the prairie. Doquebuth,
the new Creator, was born of a couple from the canoe. He
was told to go to a lake (Lake Campbell) and swim and fast
to get his spirit powers, but he delayed. Finally he did so
after his family deserted him. The Old Creator came to him
in dreams. First he told Doquebuth to wave his blanket over
the water and the forest and name the four names of the
earth; this created food for everyone. Next, at the
direction of the Old Creator, he gathered the bones of the
people who lived before the flood, waved the blanket over
them and named the four names, and made people again. These
people couldn't talk, so he similarly made brains for them
from the soil. Then they spoke many different languages,
and Doquebuth blew them back to the places they lived
before the flood. Someday, another flood will come and
change the world again. [Clark, pp.
139-141]