A great rain came which lasted a long time, and waters
covered the land. The people retreated to high land, but
they were all swept away and drowned except for one pair
who found safety on the highest peak. They lived on fish,
which they cooked by placing them under their arms. They
had no fire, and, as everything was wet, they could not get
any. The waters sank, and all present Indians descended
from that couple. When the Indians died, their spirits took
the forms of various animals and insects, so the earth was
repopulated by animals also. The Indians, still lacking
fire, looked to the moon, whose fire shone brightly. The
Spider Indians and Snake Indians hatched a plan. The Spider
Indians went to the moon in a gossamer balloon, but they
kept the balloon fastened to the earth by a long rope. The
Indians on the moon were suspicious of the newcomers, but
the Spider Indians assured them that they had only come to
gamble. As they played games around the fire, a Snake
Indian climbed up the rope, darted through the fire, and
escaped down the rope again before the Moon Indians could
react. When he reached the earth, he had to travel over
rocks, sticks, and trees, and everything he touched has
henceforth contained fire. The Spider Indians were long
kept prisoners on the moon. When they were finally released
and returned to earth, ungrateful men killed them, fearing
vengeance from the Moon Indians. [Frazer, pp. 289-290]