Grandpa Xiang and his wife Ya lived at the food of Sun
mountain, barely getting by. One day, there was a beautiful
rainbow after a downpour, and Xiang followed it as he
picked bamboo shoots. He saw an eagle clutch a tiny red
snake. In pity for the snake, Xiang yelled and threw his
basket at the eagle, which dropped the snake and flew away.
Xiang saw the snake disappear in a flash of light, and a
column of smoke drifted up the mountain. That night he
dreamed that a golden dragon thanked him for saving the
life of the dragon's daughter and told him to visit.
Grandma Ya had the same dream, so they set out, with their
grandchildren, across three mountain passes and up a long
slope, as the dream had directed. A beautiful girl came and
told them that she had gone out earlier, entranced by the
rainbow, and Xiang had rescued her. She led them to an
idyllic pond and invited them to settle there. They did,
and they grew younger and stronger from eating the fish of
the pool. After a year, Xiang went back to his village and
invited the people to live up on Sun Mountain with him.
They did so and lived happily for some time. But an evil
man wasted fish, polluted the pond, and finally poisoned
all the fish. One dying fish told Xiang to make it a
corn-flour body, feed it for 81 days on dew, and make a
wooden house for himself. He did so, and all the people
except the evil man made wooden houses. After 81 days, a
fierce gale came, while the sky darkened and lightning
flashed. The fish shook itself and turned into a girl and
then into the red snake, which flew off to join the golden
dragon Xiang had seen in his dreams. It told him to take
his things into his wooden house and stay there. Pelting
rain then fell from the sky, and soon there was a vast
flood. The evil man was helpless in his stone house, but
the wooden houses of the others floated. The golden dragon
shook his body, and the upper half of Sun Mountain erupted
into the sky. The body of the evil man was buried by the
falling stones. The others floated peacefully down the
mountain and carved a giant stone fish where they settled.
This statue and the lower part of Sun Mountain can be seen
near the town of Shuilong. [L.
Miller, pp. 107-112]