When the great flood came, God built a house. Everyone
tried to crowd into it; those who failed were drowned. The
house floated on the waters for twenty days, striking the
sky three times. When the waters receded, some of the
survivors were very hungry, and although God told them not
to eat anything, they started to cook tortillas inside the
house. God sent down an angel to tell them not to light any
fire, but the smoke was already drifting into the sky. God
sent the angel again with the same message, but the people
said they were hungry and continued cooking. After the
message was ignored a third time, God told the angel to
give those people a good kick. They became dogs and
buzzards and cleaned up the earth. [Horcasitas, p. 195]
God ordered a man to build a large house and to put
animals and food in it. When he had finished, it began to
rain and continued raining for six months. The house
floated on the flood, and all who had helped build it were
saved in it. When the flood started going down, the man
sent out a raven, but it stayed out to eat dead bodies. He
next sent out a dove, which returned to tell what the raven
was doing, and ravens have been cursed to eat carrion
since. God ordered that no fires be kindled, but one man
disobeyed and was turned into a dog. [Horcasitas, p. 196]
After the world was destroyed by a flood, a boy, very
hungry, got out of his canoe to heat a gorda. The
Eternal Father said it was not yet time for a fire to be
lit and sent Saint Bartholomew to investigate who was
making the smoke. Bartholomew reminded the boy of God's
orders, but the boy pleaded that he was hungry. Saint
Bartholomew reported back to Heaven, and the Eternal Father
said to kick the boy if he again didn't understand. Saint
Bartholomew did so, and the boy turned into a dog. [Horcasitas, pp. 195-196]