Nenebuc, son of the Sun and a mortal woman, saw some
lions in a great lake. He waited for them to come to shore
to sun themselves, disguising himself by wrapping around
himself some birch bark from a rotten stump. When the lions
came, they were curious about the new stump and sent a
snake to check it out. The snake coiled around it and tried
to upset it, but Nenebuc stood firm. When the lions
themselves approached, Nenebuc wounded the wife of the
chief lion with an arrow shot. She was badly hurt but
escaped to the cave where she lived. (The cave may still be
seen in a bluff west of Smoothwater Lake.) Nenebuc donned
the skin of a toad, disguised himself as a medicine-woman,
and was admitted to the lioness. He thrust the arrow
deeper, killing her. At once, water poured out of the cave,
and the lake began to rise. Nenebuc built a raft, which was
ready no sooner than the flood reached him. As the raft
floated on the flood, Nenebuc took on animals that were
swimming in the waters. After a time, Nenebuc tied a
willow-root rope to the beaver's tail and bade him dive to
find earth below the water, but the beaver returned without
finding a bottom. Seven days later, Nenebuc let the muskrat
try. The muskrat stayed down a long time and came up dead,
but it held a little earth in its claws. Nenebuc dried the
grains from which he remade the land, but not entirely,
which is why there are swampy areas today. [Frazer, pp. 307-308]