The deluge was caused by a heavy snowfall one September.
One man foresaw the flood and warned his fellows, but in
vain; the flood covered their intended mountain escape. The
one man survived in a canoe he had built, and he rescued
animals from the waters as he sailed about. In time, he
sent the beaver, otter, muskrat, and arctic duck to dive
into the water in search of earth, but only the duck
succeeded, bringing some slime on its claws. The man spread
the slime on the water and breathed on it to make it grow.
For six days he embarked animals upon the new island; then
the land was large enough for he himself to go ashore. [Gaster, p. 118]
A rich youth and his four nephews sailed far across the
sea to seek the hand of a fair damsel who lived there. But
she would not have him, so he prepared to leave. He and his
nephews were prepared to shove off from shore, and many of
the villagers had come to see them off. One woman with an
infant in her arms said, "If they want a little girl, why
not take this one of mine?" The rich young man heard her,
extended his paddle and told her to put the infant on it,
and placed the infant next to him in the canoe. The girl
whom he had asked to marry came down to get water, but she
began sinking in the mud. As she cried for help, the young
man said it was her own fault, and she soon sank out of
sight. The girl's mother saw this, and to avenge her death
brought some tame brown bears to the water's edge and,
holding their tails, told them to raise a strong wind,
hoping in this way to drown the rich youth. The bears began
furiously digging, raising great waves. The young man's
nephews drowned, as did all inhabitants of the village
except the infant's mother and her husband. The young man,
though, had a magical white stone which, when he threw it
ahead of him, clove a smooth path through the billows. Then
he threw a harpoon at the crest of a wave. When it hit, the
wave became a mountain, and the harpoon rebounded and stuck
in the sky, where medicine-men can see it today. Land had
been formed again, and the youth found himself in a spruce
forest. Turning to the infant, he found that she had become
a radiant woman. He married her and repopulated the drowned
earth. The couple from his wife's village became the
ancestors of the people overseas. [Frazer, pp. 313-314]