Wekwek, the Falcon, visited Wennok Lake, a region new to
him, and found many ducks and geese. His grandfather Olle,
Coyote-man, taught him how to make and use a sling. Wekwek
went back to the area, killed hundreds of birds, gathered
them, and brought them back to Olle. The next day, Wekwek
saw Sahte, Weasel-man, coming and going and was curious
about him. Wekwek followed Sahte north to Clear Lake and
found his home while Sahte was out. He found several sacks
of shell-bead money there and took it all back with him.
When Sahte returned, he wanted to find out who stole his
money. He set fire to one end of a stick and pointed it in
different directions. When it pointed south towards the
thief, the flame leaped from the stick and spread
southward. Wekwek was concerned when he saw that the
country to the north was on fire, and he told Olle. Olle
knew the reason for the fire, but he said only, "The people
up there are burning tules." When the fire came close so
that Wekwek thought they would soon burn, he confessed to
Olle that he had stolen the money and hidden it in the
creek. Olle then took a sack from his roundhouse and beat
it against an oak tree, creating fog. He beat another sack
against the tree, causing more fog, and then rain. He said
the rain would last for ten days and nights. The rain
covered all the land except the top of Mount Konokti.
Wekwek flew around in the rain and eventually found that
refuge. On the tenth day, the rain stopped, and the water
started going down. After about a week, the land was bare
again. At that time, there were no real people in the
world. Olle took the feathers of the geese that Wekwek had
killed at Wennok lake. They traveled over the country, and
whenever they found a good site, Olle laid two feathers
side by side. The next morning, each pair of feathers had
turned into a man and a woman. Later, Wekwek commented to
Olle that the people had no fire, and Olle sent Wekewillah,
the Shrew-mice brothers, to steal fire from Kahkahte, the
Crow, who had it at his roundhouse. They succeeded, and
Olle put the fire in the buckeye tree. [Merriam, pp. 138-151]