Iskender-Iulcarni (Alexander the Great), in the course
of his conquests, demanded tribute from Katife, Queen of
Smyrna. She refused insultingly and threatened to drown the
king if he persisted. Enraged at her insolence, the
conqueror determined to punish the queen by drowning her in
a great flood. He employed Moslem and infidel workmen to
make a strait of the Bosphorus, paying the infidel workmen
one-fifth as much as the Moslems got. When the canal was
nearly completed, he reversed the pay arrangements, giving
the Moslems only one-fifth as much as the infidels. The
Moslems quit in disgust and left the infidels to finish the
canal. The Black Sea swept away the last dike and drowned
the workmen. The flood spread over Queen Katife's country
(drowning her) and several cities in Africa. The whole
world would have been engulfed, but Iskender-Iulcarni was
prevailed upon to open the Strait of Gibraltar, letting the
Mediterranean escape into the ocean. Evidence of the flood
can still be seen in the form of drowned cities on the
coast of Africa and ship moorings high above the coast of
the Black Sea. [Gaster, pp.
91-92]