People came who hunted for sport, burned and cleared
forests, and didn't think of the animals as their brothers.
The Great Spirit was sad and let the people's smoke from
their fires lie in the valleys. The people coughed and
choked but continued their evil ways. The Great Spirit sent
rains to extinguish the fires and destroy the people. The
people moved to the hills as the waters rose. Spotted Bear,
the medicine man, said they would be safe as long as they
had buffalo, but there were no buffalo around. The young
men went hunting for buffalo, revising their treatment of
nature as they went. The waters rose, and people climbed to
the mountains. Finally, two men came back with the hide of
a white bull buffalo which had tried to climb to the
mountains but had drowned in the floodwaters, though a cow
and young buffalo survived. Spotted Bear announced that,
since the people were no longer destroying the world, that
buffalo would save those who were left. With help from
other medicine men, he scraped and stretched the hide,
stretching it over the whole village. Each day the wet hide
stretched farther, until it covered all of Yellowstone
Valley. Rain no longer fell in the valley, and people and
animals moved back there. The hide began to sag, but
Spotted Bear raised the west end to catch the West Wind,
which made the skin a dome over the valley. The Great
Spirit, seeing that people were living at peace with the
earth, stopped the rain. The sun shone on the hide,
shrinking it until all that was left was a rainbow arch.
[Edmonds & Clark, pp. 17-19]