Thunder God demanded half of Bubo's crops, but Bubo
tricked him into taking the tops of taro and the roots of
rice. Thunder God retaliated by withdrawing rain from the
earth. Bubo led his people to open the copper sluice gate
of the heavenly river a crack, but Thunder God closed it
tight and lifted heaven higher so the people couldn't come
again. Bubo went to the Dragon King to demand water of him.
Dragon King refused, but he was forced to release his
stream when Bubo held him tight and the people plucked out
almost all his beard. By the third year, this stream dried
up. Bubo climbed the sun-moon tree on Mount Bachi to heaven
to fight Thunder God. Qigao, one of the thunder soldiers,
told Bubo that Thunder God was determined to kill people
with drought and pointed out his location. Bubo caught him
and made him promise to send rain in three days, but
Thunder God went back on his promise. Qigao brought world
that Thunder God was grinding his axe. Bubo put a slippery
surface on his roof and instructed his wife and children to
stand ready with clubs and a net. Thunder God came in a
rainstorm and tried to land on Bubo's house but slipped off
and was captured. Bubo imprisoned Thunder God in a granary,
warning his family not to give him an ax or any water, but
his children, Fuyi and his sister, were enticed to give him
some indigo ink, and the moisture gave Thunder God the
strength to escape. The children were angry that he had
tricked them, but Thunder God promised that he would repay
them by saving them from the flood that he would bring in a
few days. He gave them one of his teeth and told them to
plant it. They did so, and it grew into a vine with a giant
gourd fruit. Fuyi and his sister scooped out the pith and
entered it. Thunder God breached the dike holding back the
river of heaven, and Dragon King, in revenge against Bubo's
plucking his beard, released his lake water, too. The water
rose over the mountains as high as heaven's ceiling. Bubo,
though, rode the waves floating on an inverted umbrella. He
made for the gate of heaven and attacked Thunder God,
chopping off his feet. (Thunder God later replaced them
with chicken feet.) Thunder God, with the help of Dragon
King, rapidly made the water subside so Bubo could not
reach him. Bubo and his umbrella dropped from the sky and
were smashed. Bubo's heart was thrown onto the ceiling of
heaven and remains there as the planet Venus. Fuyi and his
sister landed safely in the soft gourd. They wandered the
earth but found nobody else. They came across a turtle
which said the two of them should marry. Fuyi and his
sister said, "How can a brother and sister marry?" and said
if the turtle can come back to life after they beat it
death, they would marry. They beat it to death, whereupon
it laughed and crawled away. A bamboo also told them to
marry; they cut it down, and it came back to life and
laughed as they left. Venus spoke to them, told them to
build fires on two different mountains, and if the smoke
columns joined, they could marry. They did so, the smoke
columns came together, Venus laughed, and the brother and
sister married. They gave birth to a fleshball. Not knowing
what to do with it, they minced it up and scattered the
pieces, and the pieces became men and women. Qigao became a
worm, which Thunder God attacks when he comes to the
surface. [L. Miller, pp. 137-150]