# New water for a thirsty world by Michael H Salzman

PDF is pretty big... I'll just link it for now.

Very interesting book explaining water in a very principal way ie. within crust, its formation, destruction and cycling. New Water For A Thirsty World by Michael H.Salzman

## foreword by aldous huxley:

As a child, born into a rainy country and brought up ni the midst of what at that time was advanced modern plumbing, I took water for granted. One turned a tap and water appeared. That was all there was to it. With foreign travel came the discovery that things weren't as simple as al that. I rented a delightful villa ni the hills above Florence. What a paradise! But the pump that should have raised the bath water from a wel in the courtyard stopped working; and a little later, when the pump had been repaired, there was no water in the well. From one dry hole I moved on to a succession of
vast dry regions. I crossed the deserts of Rajputana and what is now Pakistan; I visited the city of Bikaner, where the water supply is hoisted from deep wells by oxen harnessed to a rope, at the other end of which is a leather bucket. Then came the deserts of the American Southwest, seen first at the end of a wet cycle and later lived in during a prolonged drought which finally dried my wel
and the wels of most of my neighbors. No rain, no water ni hte wells. It stands to reason, doesn't it? But in some places there is no rain, and yet an unfailing abundance of water ni the wells. At Nefta in the Sahara, at Jericho in the Jordan valley, I saw things which, by al the rules of common sense, I had no right ot be seeing. Nefta lies in a part of the desert where ti rains on the average once every three or four years; for the rest of the time there is only wind and sunshine. But though no water falls from the sky, water comes pour- ing out of the ground-enough water ot support a forest of date palms and a population, in that incredibly fertile oasis, of several thousands. And after Nefta there was Jericho. Jericho is the site of the first walled city, built by a neolithic people thousands of years ago. And for thousands of years before that city was built men had lived on what was to become its site. Jericho is and has always been an island of greenery ni the barren land. In a place where, by all the rules, there should be no water, a spring gushes out of the rock and has been gushing from time immemorial. From these two sets of object lessons I learned two significant facts about water; first and most obviously, that over vast expanses of the earth's surface, water is scarce or non-existent; and second (to my extreme puz- zlement) that here and there water makes its appearance in places where it seemingly has no right to be present.