The Dzhanibekov Effect. "While he was busy unloading the transporter ship, Vladimir Dzhanibekov twisted his finger on one of the fastening tab nuts, which fastened ribbons holding containers for packing things sent to space. Usually, the tab nut was twisted from a double bolt and flew off, and Vladimir caught it and hid it in his pocket. However, one day the astronaut did not manage to catch the nut, therefore, to his great amazement, it flew about 40 centimetres, and then suddenly turned 180 degrees across the axis of its rotation and flew farther, rotating in the same direction, but by another pole, and after about 40 more centimetres the nut turned over again. This phenomenon was so interesting to the astronaut that he installed the nut back and again twisted it. The result was the same! 

After a bit of confusion in the academic circles, it became apparent that it was possible to explain the effect of Dzhanibekov with the help of classical mechanics. The essence of the phenomenon lies in the fact that a body that rotates freely in zero gravity has VARIOUS moments of inertia, impulses and initial speeds of rotation relative to different axes of rotation. The fact is that when you untwist the nut, it's hard to give it a strict rotation only on one axis. There will necessarily be a minimum momentum imparted to the body directed relative to the other axis. Gradually, this impulse accumulates and outweighs the axial rotation of the body (tab nut). Thus, the body first rotates around one axis; then this axis suddenly turns over in the opposite direction. There is a somersault, but the body continues to rotate in the same direction as before the overturn. After the same time, the axis again turns over, returning to its former position, and the body again rotates as in the beginning. This cycle can be repeated many times.

And here then unpleasant analogies come to mind with our Earth rotating in weightlessness. "But the effect of a regular cyclic reversal of poles in a body rotating in zero gravity only affects bodies with an unstable center of gravity, what does this have to do with our Earth?" -The Attentive Reader will ask. However, forgive me, what stable center of gravity can we speak of in our planet?"

[1] https://youtu.be/dL6Pt1O_gSE
[2] https://geocenter.info/en/article/kogda-solnce-vzojdjot-na-zapade-ili-jeffekt-dzhanibekova-i-klimat-zemli
[3] https://youtu.be/NJLdW4DHRcA

# Video

This video is a good explanation of the Dzhanibekov effect. TES hypothesis adds that the core has decoupled from the mantle, so the effect is limited to less than 180 degree flip before the outer layers find equilibrium again, and it seems that this is at 104 degrees. If the core and mantle remained locked, the flip would be 180 degrees.
https://youtu.be/NJLdW4DHRcA