Presentation taken from here: https://slideplayer.com/slide/6640059/

PPT in here.

## Presentation on theme: "Lecture 4-2 Cultural Responses to Climate Change: Lessons from the Holocene."— Presentation transcript:

1 Lecture 4-2 Cultural Responses to Climate Change: Lessons from the Holocene

5 8000-4000 多年前的全新世温暖期，是近万年来 的最暖时期，全球各地的温度比现在高 2-5 摄氏 度。那个时期的地球远比现在暖湿，人类生存条 件奇佳，人类的发展出现飞跃，埃及文明﹑两河流 域文明﹑印度河流域文明和中国黄河文明相继诞生 ，人类从此进入文明社会。这段时期也被古气候 学家称为 “ 人类最适宜气候期 ” 。 在距今 4000-3700 年和距今 3100-2900 年，及 17 世纪附近，有过三次千年尺度的寒冷期，出现了 严重的低温冷害﹑洪涝﹑乾旱﹑沙漠化灾害，造成印 度河文明在 3900 年前突然湮灭﹑环地中海文明在 三千年前衰落等悲剧的出现

6 Native global flood stories are documented as history or legend in almost every region on earth Old world missionaries reported their amazement at finding remote tribes already possessing legends with tremendous similarities to the Bible's accounts of the worldwide flood Ancient civilizations such as (China, Babylonia, Wales, Russia, India, America, Hawaii, Scandinavia, Sumatra, Peru, and Polynesia) all have their own versions of a giant flood

9 近 1000 年来气候旱涝 变化周期的缩短与朝 代演替频率的加快

11 Climate - Society Theories “Cultural Determinism”:the culture in which we are raised determines who we are at emotional and behavioral levels –Culture alone determines culture. –Prevalent throughout 18th-19th century Europe “Environmental determinism” –Human culture is determined by the environment. Charles Darwin “Origin of Species”, 1870’s “Possiblism” –Compromise: The natural environment influences the range of available (possible) human choices.

12 Overview Climate of the last 10,000 years (Holocene): –Punctuated by large and persistent climate changes every ~1000-2000 years. Cultural responses to past climate change: –The Classic Maya and Akkadian empires. We can learn about our future by studying the past.

13 Introduction Water availability is the critical factor regulating life in semiarid environments. Cultures can and do adapt to interannual to decadal changes in climate. How have cultures responded to longer-term (decade to century-scale) changes? Combine detailed and well-dated paleoclimate and archeological records.

14 What do we know about the climate of the last 1,000 years? Instrumental climate records are too short (100-200 years). Longer records of past climate change (paleoclimate): –Glaciers –tree rings –corals –lake and ocean sediments

15 Tree-ring record of drought in the American SW wet dry

16 The 1930s Dust Bowl Six year drought (1933- 1938), well-documented. Due to wanton farming practices ( 肆意耕作实践 ) and over-capitalization. Cost over $1 billion in 1930’s dollars, federal relief programs. US was better prepared for a longer drought in 1950s.

17 Sea Surface Temperature Anomaly 1932-1939 OBSERVED Contour interval = 0.2°C A cold, La Nina-like, tropical Pacific Ocean

18 La NiñaLa Niña state Warm water accumulates in far western Pacific. Equatorial water is cooler than in the normal state

19 The Dust Bowl Precipitation Anomaly (1932-1939) GOGA MODEL GOGA MODEL = Global Sea Surface Temperature Specified Contour interval = 2 mm/month OBSERVED

20 What about BEFORE the instrumental record? Tree ring evidence for drought Thickness of tree rings in some species is sensitive to rainfall. Narrow band = dry climate

21 Cook et al., Science (2004) A Longer Perspective on Drought: Tree Ring Reconstructions Past droughts have been longer and more severe drier wetter

22 Medieval Droughts Similar pattern as modern drought. Conditions persisted MUCH longer (20-40yrs) ‘Mega-droughts’ 40 years 30 years 25 years 22 years

23 Drought and the Anasazi (ancestral Pueblo) Classic example of cultural impacts of climate change. Studies of the Four Corners region show population crashes related to megadroughts Benson et al. (2006) Number of habitation sites

24 Anasazi depopulation of the SW US The “Great Drought” spanned 1272-1298 AD (~26 years). Other factors: Warfare, balkanization, religion. Mesa Verde, CO

25 Interannual-Decadal Variability –Severe droughts lasting decades are common (many per millennium). –This mode of climate variability is present in the instrumental record (that is, expected). –Cultures can and do readily adapt to these variations. Is this the full range of natural climate variability at socially-relevant timescales?

26 Holocene Climate The Holocene represents the present warm period (last ca. 12,000 years). It’s “Our Time”, spanning the emergence of agriculture and civilizations. –How stable was it? –What factors influenced Holocene climate change?

27 Mechanisms of Holocene Climate Change –Long-term: Earth orbital variations (millennia) –Shorter-term: Solar variability, volcanic eruptions and greenhouse gases (century-scale) –Ocean-atmosphere interactions (El-Niño, NAO…) –Natural, unforced variability (random)

28 Stable or Unstable Holocene? Unstable! Persistent 1500±500 year variability

29 The Little Ice Age and Medieval Warm Period were the most recent of these events... Most of the variability over the past 1000 years due to solar variability and volcanism.

30 Cultural Responses to Holocene Climate Change Paleoclimate records document large climate changes which persisted for many centuries to millennia. Climate transitions can be very abrupt. Regional to global (?) extent. What impact did these climate perturbations have on complex societies living at the time? Examples: –Akkadian Empire (ca. 4200 yrs BP) –Classic Maya Empire (ca. 1200 yrs BP)

31 Akkadian Imperial Collapse (4200 yrs BP) First empire imperialized Mesopotamia between 4300-4200 yr BP. Imperialization linked productive rainfed (semiarid) agriculture of northern Mesopotamia (Sumer) with south. Collapse occurred near 4170±150 yr BP (Weiss et al., 1993). Collapse was previously attributed to political disintegration.

32 Tell Leilan, NE Syria Weiss et al. (1993) excavated this former Akkadian imperial town. Their results suggested rapid abandonment due to onset of aridity. At right, a ~600m 2 excavated residential occupation with roadway.

33 Deep-Sea Sediment Record of Mesopotamian Climate Cullen et al. (2000) tested the Weiss et al. (1993) claim using the deep-sea sediment record to reconstruct changes in Mesopotamian climate. –Late Holocene aridity record should be preserved in deep-sea sediments. Dr. Heidi Cullen The Weather Channel !

34 Mesopotamian Dust Dust storm over Mesopotamia (May, 2000) Same dust storm, 10 days later, over the Gulf of Oman

35 Climate Change and Akkadian Collapse Cullen et al. (2000)

36 Akkadian Collapse Onset of ~300 year period of greatly increased aridity near 4025±125 yr BP coincides with Akkadian collapse at 4170±150 yr BP (within dating uncertainty). –How widespread was the collapse? Enhanced aridity at this time also reported for Turkey, Israel, and Egypt. Nd and Sr isotopes confirm dust is from a Mesopotamian source similar to Tell Leilan. Volcanic glass shards found at Tell Leilan and in the deep-sea are geochemically correlative.

37 Classic Maya Culture (300-900 AD) Classic Maya culture ruled Mesoamerica from 250 to 850 AD. Late Classic culture (550-850 AD) known for highly stratified society, vast trade networks, and widespread construction of urban centers and monumental stellae. 8-15 million people across Yucatan Peninsula Tikal (Guatemala)

38 Classic Maya Collapse (800 AD) Classic Maya empire collapsed at peak intellectual and cultural development at 900 AD. Lowland urban abandonment End of monument construction Cultural disintegration Why did this great civilization fall? Factors cited: Deforestation, overpopulation, warfare, religious and social upheaval. Largest urban center: Palenque

39 1. Why did Copán collapse? 2. Was the end a gradual decline or a rapid fall? The spongy-looking areas at the back of the skull are caused by a lack of iron in the diet. This person suffered from malnutrition. 80 percent of the skeletons found at Copán show evidence of anemia.

40 Sociopolitical Causes of Collapse The sociopolitical causes include: peasant revolts resulting in the overthrowing of the elite class peasant revolts resulting in the overthrowing of the elite class inter-site warfare between Maya city- states inter-site warfare between Maya city- states invasions by peoples from outside the Maya civilization invasions by peoples from outside the Maya civilization failure of centralized political authority failure of centralized political authority Copan sacrificial alter On one of these unfinished sides, the Maya text shows a date, equivalent to February 10, A.D. 822. The remaining text was never finished. There are no known monuments at Copán dated after A.D. 822.

41 Natural Causes of Collapse Natural causes include factors such as: soil exhaustion due to slash-and-burn agriculture soil exhaustion due to slash-and-burn agriculture water loss and erosion of topsoil evident by increased sedimentation in lakes water loss and erosion of topsoil evident by increased sedimentation in lakes natural disasters such as earthquakes and hurricanes natural disasters such as earthquakes and hurricanes climatic change climatic change disease disease insect infestations insect infestations overpopulation overpopulation Copan Great Ball Court

42 Natural Causes of Collapse When examining the natural causes that could have incited or enhanced the collapse, a further set of both human- induced and natural climatic factors of the Yucatan Peninsula need to be considered When examining the natural causes that could have incited or enhanced the collapse, a further set of both human- induced and natural climatic factors of the Yucatan Peninsula need to be considered Some scientists theorize that the paleoclimate of the region was not only different than the present day climate, but that the natural climatic variability of the past could have included a period of intense drought that occurred at the time of the Classic Maya Collapse Some scientists theorize that the paleoclimate of the region was not only different than the present day climate, but that the natural climatic variability of the past could have included a period of intense drought that occurred at the time of the Classic Maya Collapse Water deficit on the Yucatan © NOAA

43 Symptoms of the Collapse Rapid depopulation of the countryside and ceremonial centers in 50 to 100 years, Rapid depopulation of the countryside and ceremonial centers in 50 to 100 years, Abandonment of administrative and residential structures Abandonment of administrative and residential structures Copan East Plaza with Temple of Inscriptions and alter Q; R: Copan East Plaza and Temple 11 with Popol Nah.

44 Symptoms of the Collapse Cessation of: building construction, carving of sculptured monuments, manufacture of pottery, stonework, jade carvings, Classic calendar and writing systems. Cessation of: building construction, carving of sculptured monuments, manufacture of pottery, stonework, jade carvings, Classic calendar and writing systems. Above: Copan temple; Above R: corbeled block-work used by Maya; lBelow R: Copan sculpture.

45 Yucatan Modern Climate  Before studying the paleoclimate of the region, it is important to understand the region's modern climate.  Temperature is uniformly warm on the Yucatan Peninsula with a mean annual temperature of 25 o C. Precipitation increases from north to south with minimum values of 500 mm/yr along the NW coast to a maximum of 2500 mm/yr in the southern lowlands. Precipitation increases from north to south with minimum values of 500 mm/yr along the NW coast to a maximum of 2500 mm/yr in the southern lowlands. Rainfall is highly seasonal with the rainy season occurring in the summer, May through September, and the dry season during winter, October through April. Rainfall is highly seasonal with the rainy season occurring in the summer, May through September, and the dry season during winter, October through April. All of the Yucatan is marked by an annual water deficit that is lowest in the southern Yucatan and highest along the NW coast. All of the Yucatan is marked by an annual water deficit that is lowest in the southern Yucatan and highest along the NW coast. Koeppen Climate classification © NOAA

46 Lake Sediments The raw material for paleoenvironmental studies is sediment that accumulates in an ordered manner through time and records changes in past climate conditions. The raw material for paleoenvironmental studies is sediment that accumulates in an ordered manner through time and records changes in past climate conditions. The sediments are analogous to a magnetic cassette tape recording, and the challenge for paleoclimatologists is to "play back" the tape. The sediments are analogous to a magnetic cassette tape recording, and the challenge for paleoclimatologists is to "play back" the tape. Fossil pollen preserved in lake sediments are often used to reconstruct vegetation changes that can be influenced by climate. Fossil pollen preserved in lake sediments are often used to reconstruct vegetation changes that can be influenced by climate. Sediment core from Lake Chichancanab

47 Lake Sediment Cores Scientists reconstructed the past climate of the Maya civilization by studying lake sediment cores on the Yucatan Peninsula. The first area of study, Lake Chichancanab, is located in the center of the Yucatan. Lake Chichancanab is a long (26-km), narrow (2 km) lake, consisting of a series of basins that are connected during high water level. Jason Curtis holding core form Lake Chichancanab

48 Lake Chichancanab Sediment cores were collected from the central basin in a water depth of 6.9 m. Sediment cores were collected from the central basin in a water depth of 6.9 m. The lake lies in a fault depression caused by normal faulting. The steep hills on the eastern side of the lake represent the fault line. The lake lies in a fault depression caused by normal faulting. The steep hills on the eastern side of the lake represent the fault line.

49 Lake Sediments Pollen cannot be used to reconstruct climate during the Classic Period because the Maya severely altered regional vegetation through clear cutting of the forest for agricultural purposes. Pollen cannot be used to reconstruct climate during the Classic Period because the Maya severely altered regional vegetation through clear cutting of the forest for agricultural purposes. It would be impossible to tell, whether a given vegetation change was caused by climate or human agricultural activity. It would be impossible to tell, whether a given vegetation change was caused by climate or human agricultural activity. Because of this, scientists rely upon geochemical (elemental and isotopic) evidence for climatic change found trapped in the shells of tiny Crustacea called ostracods. Because of this, scientists rely upon geochemical (elemental and isotopic) evidence for climatic change found trapped in the shells of tiny Crustacea called ostracods.

50 Oxygen Isotopes One of the most important tools used to reconstruct the ratio of evaporation to precipitation is oxygen isotopes. One of the most important tools used to reconstruct the ratio of evaporation to precipitation is oxygen isotopes. Lake water (H 2 O) contains both the light isotope ( 16 O) and heavy isotope ( 18 O) of the element oxygen. Lake water (H 2 O) contains both the light isotope ( 16 O) and heavy isotope ( 18 O) of the element oxygen. When water evaporates, the lighter isotope (H 2 16 O) evaporates at a faster rate than the heavier isotope (H 2 18 O) because it has a higher vapor pressure. When water evaporates, the lighter isotope (H 2 16 O) evaporates at a faster rate than the heavier isotope (H 2 18 O) because it has a higher vapor pressure. The reverse happens when water condenses. As long as evaporation equals precipitation over the lake, the lake is at a steady state and the ratio of 18 O to 16 O will be constant. The reverse happens when water condenses. As long as evaporation equals precipitation over the lake, the lake is at a steady state and the ratio of 18 O to 16 O will be constant. However, if climate becomes drier and evaporation exceeds precipitation, the lake volume will be reduced and the ratio of 18 O to 16 O in lake water will increase. However, if climate becomes drier and evaporation exceeds precipitation, the lake volume will be reduced and the ratio of 18 O to 16 O in lake water will increase. Illustration From Curtis, et al © 2007

51 Oxygen Isotopes Alternatively, under wet climatic conditions, the lake level will rise and the ratio of 18 O to 16 O will decrease. In closed basin lakes, the ratio of 18 O to 16 O in lake water is controlled mainly by the balance between evaporation and precipitation. Alternatively, under wet climatic conditions, the lake level will rise and the ratio of 18 O to 16 O will decrease. In closed basin lakes, the ratio of 18 O to 16 O in lake water is controlled mainly by the balance between evaporation and precipitation. The 18 O to 16 O ratio of lake water is recorded by aquatic organisms, such as gastropods and ostracods that precipitate shells of calcium carbonate (CaCO 3 ). The 18 O to 16 O ratio of lake water is recorded by aquatic organisms, such as gastropods and ostracods that precipitate shells of calcium carbonate (CaCO 3 ). Scientists can measure the 18 O to 16 O ratio in fossil shells in sediment cores to reconstruct changes in evaporation/precipitation through time, thus inferring climatic change. Scientists can measure the 18 O to 16 O ratio in fossil shells in sediment cores to reconstruct changes in evaporation/precipitation through time, thus inferring climatic change. Illustration © From Curtis, et al © 2007

52 Hydrology: Closed Basin Lakes This study consisted of taking sediment cores from two different lakes centrally located on the Yucatan. This study consisted of taking sediment cores from two different lakes centrally located on the Yucatan. Both Lakes Chichancanab and Punta Laguna are considered to be closed-basin lakes. Both Lakes Chichancanab and Punta Laguna are considered to be closed-basin lakes. The geology of Yucatan is karst (porous limestone), many of the lakes are perched above the water table and isolated hydrologically by clay-basin seals. The geology of Yucatan is karst (porous limestone), many of the lakes are perched above the water table and isolated hydrologically by clay-basin seals. Illustration From Curtis, et al © 2007

53 Closed Basin Lakes Closed-basin lakes have simple water budgets, and typically receive water by precipitation, slope wash, and groundwater seepage, while losing a majority of their water through evaporation. Closed-basin lakes have simple water budgets, and typically receive water by precipitation, slope wash, and groundwater seepage, while losing a majority of their water through evaporation. Therefore the lake volume, dissolved solute concentrations and oxygen isotopic ratios are largely controlled by the ratio of evaporation to precipitation. Therefore the lake volume, dissolved solute concentrations and oxygen isotopic ratios are largely controlled by the ratio of evaporation to precipitation. This characteristic makes closed-basin lakes climatically sensitive to the changing conditions of evaporation or precipitation. This characteristic makes closed-basin lakes climatically sensitive to the changing conditions of evaporation or precipitation. Illustration From Curtis, et al © 2007

54 Sedimentation Rates When the cores are returned to the lab, they are split in two halves. One-half of the core is sampled and the other half is archived for future use. When the cores are returned to the lab, they are split in two halves. One-half of the core is sampled and the other half is archived for future use. The core that was sampled from Lake Chichancanab had a total length of 4.9 m with a basal radiocarbon age of 9000 years BP. The core that was sampled from Lake Chichancanab had a total length of 4.9 m with a basal radiocarbon age of 9000 years BP. The sedimentation rate averaged about 0.5 mm per year. The sedimentation rate averaged about 0.5 mm per year. The core was sampled continuously at 1-cm intervals over its length. The core was sampled continuously at 1-cm intervals over its length. A 1-cm sample in the Lake Chichancanab core represents about 20 years of deposition. A 1-cm sample in the Lake Chichancanab core represents about 20 years of deposition. The sedimentation rate determines the temporal resolution of study and as a result, scientists are able to reconstruct climatic changes that lasted for multiple decades or longer. The sedimentation rate determines the temporal resolution of study and as a result, scientists are able to reconstruct climatic changes that lasted for multiple decades or longer. The sediments of Chichancanab consisted of alternating layers of organic matter, calcite, and gypsum. The sediments of Chichancanab consisted of alternating layers of organic matter, calcite, and gypsum.

55 Punta Laguna Core The total core length from Punta Laguna was 6.3m with a basal age of 3300 years. The total core length from Punta Laguna was 6.3m with a basal age of 3300 years. The sedimentation rate averaged 2 mm/year, which is about four times greater than the sedimentation rate in the core from Chichancanab. The sedimentation rate averaged 2 mm/year, which is about four times greater than the sedimentation rate in the core from Chichancanab. A 1-cm sample for the Punta Laguna core represents only 5 years of deposition, permitting the resolution of much shorter climatic events. A 1-cm sample for the Punta Laguna core represents only 5 years of deposition, permitting the resolution of much shorter climatic events. Sediments in the Punta Laguna core are composed almost entirely of calcium carbonate(CaCO 3 ). Sediments in the Punta Laguna core are composed almost entirely of calcium carbonate(CaCO 3 ). Above and previous cores are similar representation taken from recent Trinidad expedition.

56 Lake Chichancanab Core Results Data from the Lake Chichancanab core supports the following interpretation that begins at the base of the core: Data from the Lake Chichancanab core supports the following interpretation that begins at the base of the core: From 9200 to 7800 years BP, there was no lake at the coring site as indicated by the absence of aquatic microfossils and the presence of land snails. From 9200 to 7800 years BP, there was no lake at the coring site as indicated by the absence of aquatic microfossils and the presence of land snails. Beginning at about 7800 years BP, the lake began to fill but the salinity was much higher than today. Beginning at about 7800 years BP, the lake began to fill but the salinity was much higher than today. Evidence for this includes high sulfur content indicating gypsum precipitation, very high 18 O and 16 O ratios in both ostracods and gastropods, and the occurrence of a benthic foraminifera, Ammonia beccarri. Evidence for this includes high sulfur content indicating gypsum precipitation, very high 18 O and 16 O ratios in both ostracods and gastropods, and the occurrence of a benthic foraminifera, Ammonia beccarri. Foraminiferas are almost exclusively marine forms but this species can tolerate a wide range of salinity (7 to 67 ppt); however, it only reproduces between 13 and 40 ppt. The large number of specimens of A. beccarri suggests salinities of at least 13 ppt (the modern lake salinity is only 4 ppt). Foraminiferas are almost exclusively marine forms but this species can tolerate a wide range of salinity (7 to 67 ppt); however, it only reproduces between 13 and 40 ppt. The large number of specimens of A. beccarri suggests salinities of at least 13 ppt (the modern lake salinity is only 4 ppt).

57 Data from Lake Chichancanab

58 Oxygen Isotope Results This slide compares the oxygen isotope record on the same species of gastropod between the two lake cores: Punta Laguna (above) and Chichancanab (below). This slide compares the oxygen isotope record on the same species of gastropod between the two lake cores: Punta Laguna (above) and Chichancanab (below). Note that the Punta Laguna record is much higher resolution owing to higher sedimentation rates than Chichancanab. Note that the Punta Laguna record is much higher resolution owing to higher sedimentation rates than Chichancanab. Within the error of the radiocarbon age models, the period of higher mean 18 O values in Punta Laguna correlates with the interval of increasing sulfur and oxygen isotope values in Chichancanab. Within the error of the radiocarbon age models, the period of higher mean 18 O values in Punta Laguna correlates with the interval of increasing sulfur and oxygen isotope values in Chichancanab. From Curtis, et al 2007 ©

59 Punta Laguna Oxygen Isotope Results The oxygen isotope data measured on ostracods from Punta Laguna sediments have been converted from radiocarbon years to calendar years and compared to Mayan cultural periods. Superimposed upon the mean changes in the record are distinct peaks that represent arid climate conditions. Superimposed upon the mean changes in the record are distinct peaks that represent arid climate conditions. These peaks occur at 585 A.D., 862 A.D., 986 A.D., 1051 A.D. and 1391 A.D. Error is approximately +/-50 years. These peaks occur at 585 A.D., 862 A.D., 986 A.D., 1051 A.D. and 1391 A.D. Error is approximately +/-50 years. From Curtis, et al © 2007

60 Ostracod Climate Data From Curtis, et al © 2007

61 Comparison of Ostracod Data and Maya Cultural Periods The first peak at 585 A.D. coincides with the early/late Classic boundary. The first peak at 585 A.D. coincides with the early/late Classic boundary. This boundary is associated with the "Maya Hiatus", which lasted between 530 and 630 A.D. This boundary is associated with the "Maya Hiatus", which lasted between 530 and 630 A.D. The Maya Hiatus was marked by a sharp decline in monument carving, abandonment in some areas and social upheaval. The Maya Hiatus was marked by a sharp decline in monument carving, abandonment in some areas and social upheaval. This event may have been drought-related. This event may have been drought-related. From Curtis, et al 2007

62 Comparison of Ostracod Data and Maya Cultural Periods During the next 200 years from 600 to 800 A.D., the late Classic Maya flourished and reached their cultural and artistic apex. During the next 200 years from 600 to 800 A.D., the late Classic Maya flourished and reached their cultural and artistic apex. The next peak in 18O/16O occurs at 862 A.D. and coincides with the collapse of Classic Maya civilization between 800 and 900 A.D. The next peak in 18O/16O occurs at 862 A.D. and coincides with the collapse of Classic Maya civilization between 800 and 900 A.D. The earliest Postclassic Period was also relatively dry between 986 and 1051 A.D. At about 1000 A.D., mean oxygen isotope values decrease indicating a return to more humid conditions. The earliest Postclassic Period was also relatively dry between 986 and 1051 A.D. At about 1000 A.D., mean oxygen isotope values decrease indicating a return to more humid conditions. From Curtis, et al 2007

63 Cariaco Basin (Venezuela) Annual laminations Some of the best available climate records for the lowland Maya region

64 Results Although a Postclassic resurgence occurred in the northern Yucatan, city-states in the southern lowlands remained sparsely occupied. Although a Postclassic resurgence occurred in the northern Yucatan, city-states in the southern lowlands remained sparsely occupied. These findings support a rather strong correlation between times of drought and major cultural discontinuities in Classic Maya civilization. These findings support a rather strong correlation between times of drought and major cultural discontinuities in Classic Maya civilization. Tikal Temple I and Temple II

65 Cariaco Basin laminated sediments Mayan collapse occurred during a 150-year drought! wet dry Climate Change and Classic Maya Collapse 012 Haug G H, Gunther D, Peterson L C D, et al. 2003. Climate and the collapse of Mayan civilization. Science, 299: 1731- 1735

66 What can be learned from these examples? Complex societies are sensitive to climate change. Paleoclimate records document changes in climate which surpassed modern variability. Other social factors in each case may have contributed to observed collapse. Collapse occurred despite evidence that these cultures had large buffering capacities.

67 Conclusions Modern and ancient cultures: - Thrive in marginal environments. -Plan for the future based on recent past (regrettably) -Learn and adapt (fortunately). Only ancient cultures experienced century-scale drought. Their past can be a guide to our future.

68 Lessons from the past Complex societies are both adaptive and vulnerable to climate change. Past climate changes far surpassed modern variability. Collapse occurred despite large buffering capacities.

69 Effects of Deteriorated Environment Event on the Neolithic Culture of China, around 5 000 a BP A number of environmental records reveal that there was a rapid environmental deterioating event all over the world ca 5000 a BP During this period, there was a movement of vegetations zone to south in the southern China lower sea level along the coast in the southern and eastern China, and desertificat ion in some sites of northern China there was a fargoing regradation or discontinuity of Neolithic culture in China there were also many records of the state of culture development consistent with the environmental changes all over the world.

70 A. 敦德冰芯氧同位素 B. 岱海湖面变化 C. 螺髻山温度变化 D. 青海湖温度变化 E. 藏东南年均温变化 F. 大地湾孢粉浓度变 化 G. 博斯腾湖碳同位素 变化 H. 长白山地区温度变 化 I. 华南地区海平面变 化 J. 察素齐孢粉浓度变 化 K. GRIP 冰芯 甲烷浓度变化 L. 长江中下游地区温 度变化 M. 洱海碳同位素变化

73 前仰韶文化期 ( 8. 3~ 6. 9 ka B. P. ) 仰韶文化期 ( 6. 9~ 5. 0 ka B. P. ) 龙山文化期 ( 5. 0~ 4. 0 ka B. P. ) 6. 9 ka B. P. 前后出现一次寒 冷气候, 终止了前仰韶文化 5. 0 ka B. P. 前后的一次寒冷气 候，终止了仰韶文化期 4 ka B. P. 前后，结束了大暖期 气候, 也结束了新石器文化, 中国 历史进入文明史阶段

74 环境变化影响史前文化的原因 气候变化导致生态系统的变化 生态系统的变化导致植被的变化 植被的变化又导致影响人类生存的生物营养源 的变化 进而导致人类文化的变化 