fons primarius. "Many great and wonderful deeds are recorded of your state in our histories. But one of them exceeds all the rest in greatness and valour. For these histories tell of a mighty power which unprovoked made an expedition against the whole of Europe and Asia, and to which your city put an end. This power came forth out of the Atlantic Ocean, for in those days the Atlantic was navigable; and there was an island situated in front of the straits which are by you called the Pillars of Heracles; the island was larger than Libya and Asia put together, and was the way to other islands, and from these you might pass to the whole of the opposite continent which surrounded the true ocean; for this sea which is within the Straits of Heracles is only a harbour, having a narrow entrance, but that other is a real sea, and the surrounding land may be most truly called a boundless continent. Now in this island of Atlantis there was a great and wonderful empire which had rule over the whole island and several others, and over parts of the continent, and, furthermore, the men of Atlantis had subjected the parts of Libya within the columns of Heracles as far as Egypt, and of Europe as far as Tyrrhenia. This vast power, gathered into one, endeavoured to subdue at a blow our country and yours and the  whole of the region within the straits; and then, Solon, your country shone forth, in the excellence of her virtue and strength, among all mankind. 
She was pre-eminent in courage and military skill, and was the leader of the Hellenes. And when the rest fell off from her, being compelled to stand alone, after having undergone the very extremity of danger, she defeated and triumphed over the invaders, and preserved from slavery those who were not yet subjugated, and generously liberated all the rest of us who dwell within the pillars. But afterwards there occurred violent earthquakes and floods; and in a single day and night of misfortune all your warlike men in a body sank into the earth, and the island of Atlantis in like manner disappeared in the depths of the sea. For which reason the sea in those parts is impassable and impenetrable, because there is a shoal of mud in the way; and this was caused by the subsidence of the island." - Plato, 360 BCE

The maps are from Atlantis: The Antediluvian World, Donnelly (1882), chosen for being a good rendition of Plato's words.

If Atlantis was built on the exposed rims of an active supervolcano, there would be nothing to find after a major eruption. Its a submerged volcanic range. The geology of the region supports the idea, as does his clear description of the circular nature of the land. I like it. Its simple. It fits well with the primary source.

Donnelly's maps are not so different to modern bathymetry. If Atlantis was swallowed and burned in convulsions of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, there would  be little to find. The loose sediments would at first have turned it into an ocean of mud, possibly blocking the straits for long enough that the Mediterranean remained partially emptied for some time. Later events (including  State 2 to State 1) would have reopened the straits and cleared the unconsolidated sediments.

I think is was here. 1500km west of Portugal and Morocco. A submarine caldera 150km wide - the crater left behind after the eruption which destroyed the rings of Atlantis.